Title: A stochastic and dynamical view of pluripotency in mouse embryonic stem
  cells
Abstract:   Pluripotent embryonic stem cells are of paramount importance for biomedical
research thanks to their innate ability for self-renewal and differentiation
into all major cell lines. The fateful decision to exit or remain in the
pluripotent state is regulated by complex genetic regulatory network. Latest
advances in transcriptomics have made it possible to infer basic topologies of
pluripotency governing networks. The inferred network topologies, however, only
encode boolean information while remaining silent about the roles of dynamics
and molecular noise in gene expression. These features are widely considered
essential for functional decision making. Herein we developed a framework for
extending the boolean level networks into models accounting for individual
genetic switches and promoter architecture which allows mechanistic
interrogation of the roles of molecular noise, external signaling, and network
topology. We demonstrate the pluripotent state of the network to be a broad
attractor which is robust to variations of gene expression. Dynamics of exiting
the pluripotent state, on the other hand, is significantly influenced by the
molecular noise originating from genetic switching events which makes cells
more responsive to extracellular signals. Lastly we show that steady state
probability landscape can be significantly remodeled by global gene switching
rates alone which can be taken as a proxy for how global epigenetic
modifications exert control over stability of pluripotent states.

Full Text: A stochastic and dynamical view of pluripotency in mouse embryonic stem cells
Yen Ting Lin,1, 2Peter G. Hufton,2Esther J. Lee,3and Davit A. Potoyan4
1T-6 and Center for Nonlinear Studies, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
2School of Physics and Astronomy, The University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK
3Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA
4Department of Chemistry, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA
(Dated: November 12, 2018)
Pluripotent embryonic stem cells are of paramount importance for biomedical research thanks to
their innate ability for self-renewal and dierentiation into all major cell lines. The fateful decision
to exit or remain in the pluripotent state is regulated by complex genetic regulatory network.
Latest advances in transcriptomics have made it possible to infer basic topologies of pluripotency
governing networks. The inferred network topologies, however, only encode boolean information
while remaining silent about the roles of dynamics and molecular noise in gene expression. These
features are widely considered essential for functional decision making. Herein we developed a
framework for extending the boolean level networks into models accounting for individual genetic
switches and promoter architecture which allows mechanistic interrogation of the roles of molecular
noise, external signaling, and network topology. We demonstrate the pluripotent state of the network
to be a broad attractor which is robust to variations of gene expression. Dynamics of exiting the
pluripotent state, on the other hand, is signicantly inuenced by the molecular noise originating
from genetic switching events which makes cells more responsive to extracellular signals. Lastly we
show that steady state probability landscape can be signicantly remodeled by global gene switching
rates alone which can be taken as a proxy for how global epigenetic modications exert control over
stability of pluripotent states.
I. INTRODUCTION
Embryonic stem cells derived from mammalian blastocyst are pluripotent: they show an indenite capacity for
self-renewal and the ability to dierentiate into every cell type constituting an adult organism [1{3]. The development
of healthy tissues hinges on the ability of these pluripotent stem cells to make critical decisions determining when
and into which kind of cells to dierentiate in response to their environment. Fates of embryonic cells are therefore
decided through sophisticated biological computations orchestrated by a vast regulatory network consisting of genetic,
epigenetic and signaling layers [3].
The dynamics of genetic expressions take place in molecular environments and are subject to intrinsic noise due to
the discrete nature of the molecular copy numbers and to extrinsic noise from extracellular environment [4]. Thus,
while at the level of the organism development is often predictable with a well-dened order of events, at the level of
single cells fate determination is fundamentally stochastic [5, 6]. An outstanding question involves understanding to
what extent the inherent molecular stochasticity in embryonic cells is suppressed or exploited for functional purposes.
Studies probing transcription in single cells have uncovered high variabilities of gene expression in embryonic stem cell
populations [7{9]. Several hypotheses about the functional roles of stochasticity in embryonic stem cells have been
put forward. Observations of dynamic and heterogeneous expression patterns of core transcription factors such as
Nanog, Oct4 and Sox2 have promoted the view that stochastic excursions of these factors are governing the stability
of pluripotent states [10, 11]. A dierent hypothesis claims transcriptional noise to be advantageous by facilitating
the exploration of the space of a gene network such that, at any instant, a subpopulation of cells is optimally primed
to be responsive to dierentiation signals [12]. The heterogeneity of populations of pluripotent cells has also raised
some concerns that pluripotency is ill-dened on a single-cell level [12] and instead should be viewed as a statistical
property of the macroscopic state emerging at the level of an ensemble of cells. A comprehensive physical picture of
pluripotency at the single-cell level therefore still remains unclear.
In this regard, the roles of modeling and computational approaches are seen as especially important for bridging the
gap between our understanding of molecular dynamics of regulatory networks and phenotypic outcomes. The rapid
accumulation of data of gene expression through single-cell experiments has stimulated the techniques of statistical
inference and computational systems biology for mapping embryonic stem cell networks [14{16]. In vitro studies
of mouse embryonic stem cells (mESC) in dierent culture conditions, in particular, have become an ideal model
system for exploring mechanistic issues surrounding pluripotency and lineage commitment in mammals [16]. In a tour
de force study of mESC by Dunn et al. [13], regulatory relationships between transcription factors were uncovered
through analysis of pairwise correlations in gene expression. Using known experimental data as constraints, a network
topology with a minimal set of genes was derived with a high degree of predictive power with respect to perturbations
of the network.arXiv:1710.08542v1  [q-bio.MN]  23 Oct 20172
LIF
CH
PDStat3
Tcf3
MEK
ERKKlf4Gbx2
EsrrbKlf2
Oct4
Sox2Sall4
Tfcp2l1
NanogExternal 
input
Regulated by both types of TF
(Tfcp2l1, Esrrb, Oct4, Nanog)⍺m
⍺m
⍺m
⍺m
⍺max
0˜ 
˜ 
˜ 
˜ 
˜⍺max
⍺max
0˜ 
˜ no bound TF
one bound repressor
two bound repressors
no bound TF
one bound repressor
one bound activator
Two bound activators
Two bound repressorsone bound activator and
one bound repressor0
0
⍺max˜ no bound TF
one bound activator
two bound activatorsRegulated by only activators
(Stat3, Gbx2, Klf2, Klf4, 
Sall4, Sox2)
Regulated by only repressors
(Tcf3, MEKERK)Conﬁguration Production rate
FIG. 1. The left panel shows a schematic diagram of the network topology, reproduced from Dunn et al. [13]. Each node
corresponds to a given gene and their placement from left to right is chosen to indicate a general trend of downstreamness
from the inputs. In our mechanistic model, each gene produces a unique transcription factor at a given rate, depending on the
binding state of its promoter sites. These transcription factors go on to bind and activate (black arrow) or repress (red bar)
other genes. The three nodes on left correspond to extra-cellular signals, which are either absent or present. The right panel
shows our assumed molecular logic of transcriptional regulation. Shown are the outcomes of combinatorial binding of activators
and repressors to promoter sites. Depending on the conguration of the promoter site, transcription factors are produced with
rates 0, ~m, and ~max, modeling the eects of cooperative binding.
Network topologies, however, remain silent about the roles of molecular noise and dynamics in stem cell dier-
entiation governed by stochastic biochemical reactions. Furthermore, in order to validate that the inferred network
reects true microscopic reality of cell and is not a result of overtting, one has to ultimately test the results using
mass-action-based kinetics which integrate relevant molecular factors. The key challenge lies in nding the adequate
resolution for the network which is able to be predictive and does not pose insurmountable computational burden.
In the present work, we outline a framework for extending boolean resolution networks into stochastic and dy-
namical models|with microscopic resolution of promoter architecture and individual gene switching events. The
computational scheme utilizes static boolean information about the network topology and uses novel analytical model
reduction to increase the computational eciency, allowing for extensive searches in the space of microscopic reac-
tion rates. This framework is successfully applied to the network topology inferred by Dunn et al. [13] in order to
build a mass action based stochastic dynamic model which is capable of describing both the discrete states of all the
genes and the populations of transcription factors. Starting from minimal assumptions about the rates of various
reactions, we nd a few distinct gene swithcing regimes where a remarkable agreement with the experimental gene
expression proles is achieved for all combinations of experimentally controlled external signals. We show that gene
expression levels in complex regulatory networks are not a unique function of gene switching rates which cautions
against over-interpreting boolean level networks and suggests strategies of inference which utilize higher moments
in distribution of transcription factors. Using single cell experiments which have probed expression of pluripotency
factors [7, 8] we are able to argue that gene switching in pluripotent states happens primarily on the intermediate
scale relative to the reactions of creation and degradation (dilution). This regime better agrees with the diverse set
of experiments available and provides explanation for the multimodality in distributions of transcription factors and
burst like expression dynamics for some genes.
In the second half of the paper, armed with a predictive and physically motivated model of pluripotency network,
we explore the dynamics of lineage commitment driven by withdrawal of various well documented signals (LIF, 2i)
for maintaining the na ve state of pluripotency. We nd a number of non-trivial consequences of molecular noise and
gene switching dynamics. In particular we show that intermediate gene switching regime generates higher sensitivity
for the network when responding to external signals.3
II. FRAMEWORK FOR DERIVING MICROSCOPIC RESOLUTION NETWORKS FROM
EXPERIMENTALLY INFERRED NETWORK TOPOLOGIES
A. Molecular logic of transcriptional regulation in ESC
Here we outline the basic steps of constructing the microscopic genetic regulatory networks from the Boolean
topology of genes inferred from experiments [13]. The network topology (Fig. 1) contains static information about the
types of interactions between pairs of genes. The interactions are classied as being either repressing or activating.
To study the dynamics of complex genetic networks, one has to extend the Boolean level description to account for
the molecular logic of gene regulation. This molecular logic species the precise relation between the binding of
transcription factors to genomic sites and the regulatory outcome in terms of gene activation, repression, etc. In the
case where the same sites can be bound to dierent transcription factors, the combinatorial nature of regulation can
give rise to ambiguity in molecular logic. Such ambiguities can be resolved either by directly inferring regulatory logic
or by simulating dierent combinatorial possibilities until sucient agreement with experiments is reached. Once
molecular logic is dened the topologic level description can be extended into a set of biochemical reactions.
The reactions in the present model include (i)the binding/unbinding of transcription factors to promoter sites
of genes and (ii)the creation/degradation of populations of transcription factors. We adopt the network of mESCs
inferred by Dunn et al. [13]. There are N= 12 genes in the network and we assign each gene Gito a discrete variable
which describes the conguration of its promoter sites. The values of Gidetermine if the transcriptional activity is
in the activated, repressed or neutral state. The npromoter sites of a particular gene allow binding of at most n
transcription factors. Since a large majority of eukaryotic transcription factors in this network bind as dimers [17] we
setn= 2 for all genes [18]. The binding reactions are
First TF binding: Gi+Pj2~konNPj       *)       
~koffGiPj;
Second TF binding: GiPj+Pk~konNPk     *)     
~koffGiPjk:(1)
Notice that we have adopted the uncooperative binding mechanism which assumes the transcription factors bind to
any of the unbound promoter sites independently with a constant rate ~kon. Other cooperative binding mechanisms
can be easily built into this framework. Each gene codes for its own transcription factor Piwhere indices i= 1;:::;N
label both genes and the corresponding transcription factors. These promoters can act as repressors or activators of
other genes: this information is contained in the experimentally-inferred topology. The molecular logic describing how
the combinatorial binding of activators and repressors regulate each gene, however, is an assumption in the model.
When the rate of transcription is non-zero, genes produce copies of their respective transcription factors. We use
a one step model of transcription [19] whereby transcription factors are produced via a unimolecular step. This
approximation coarse grains several sequential intermediate reactions, such as mRNA production, into one eective
step [20, 21]. This approximation has become popular in models of protein production [22{24]. All of the transcription
factors are assumed to have nite lifetimes set by the rate of degradation ensuring the existence of stable steady states
with nite number of molecules. The reactions are
TF production: GiPjk~jk  !GiPjk+Pi;
TF degredation: Pi~  !?:(2)
We note that one can adopt a view with higher resolution of the network depending on the available experimental data
and the type of question posed. For instance one may consider explicitly including the steps of cell cycle regulation,
dierent epigenetic states, binding of non-coding RNAs etc. For simplicity and illustrative purpose, we consider the
most simplied dynamical model which describes only the promoter congurations and the population dynamics of
the transcription factors|this model aims to use the optimal resolution for capturing trends in gene expression while
remaining feasible for ecient stochastic simulations capturing the variability in an ensemble of cells. After converting
the network topology into a higher resolution network of biochemical reactions, our next goal is to exhaustively sample
a vast space of parameter space to identify the optimal parameter regime with which the model best reproduces all
of the experimental constraints.4
FIG. 2. PDMP stochastic simulations identify three genetic switching regimes consistent with experimental data. When
switching is slow, intermediate, or fast we nd certain parameters which closely match the experimental results obtained by
Dunn et al. [13]. The consistency of our model with experimental results is measured using a Hamming distance|a measure
where one counts the number of discrepancies between the binary expression of each TF for both cases. (A) Shown are the
identied regions in parameter regimes that minimize Hamming distance. There are three free parameters: the binding rate kon,
unbinding rate ko, and basal transcription rate m. For slow switching, the parameters are kon= 3:2,ko= 0:2,m= 0:02;
for intermediate switching, kon= 16,ko= 1:5,m= 0:01; for fast switching, kon= 102,ko= 10,m= 0:005. The selected
parameter sets are presented as red dots in the landscapes in the upper panel. (B) Comparison of computed and discretized
gene expression proles with that of the experiments (Benchmark panel).
B. Multi-scale simulation of complex genetic networks
Biochemical reactions in gene networks are of fundamentally probabilistic nature. The most rigorous way to
simulate a network of reactions is by numerically solving the master equation which accounts for all possible states
of the network down to the level of single molecules [4, 19]. However in high dimensions, i.e., when the number of
species is large, this approach is not computationally ecient. Instead, kinetic Monte Carlo algorithms are the most
straightforward way to generate sample paths of the stochastic process. Fully individual-based models, however, still
suer from a steep scaling of computational time with the number of components. This fact renders them inecient
for simulating large gene networks, especially when it comes to scanning or exploring the parameter space.
A wide range of approximate schemes have been employed to simulate large scale gene regulatory networks. Most
conventional approximations so far have been the size-expansion methods which are known for being problematic when
the molecular noise induced by genetic switching becomes non-negligible. On the other hand, for embryonic stem cell
networks it is essential to account for the stochastic nature of genetic switches which give rise to multiple attractor
states corresponding to various phenotypes. A network with Ngenes can theoretically have 2Nattractors. Even if
populations of all the other species are present in large quantities, the stochastic uctuations caused by the genetic
switches (due to stochastic binding-unbinding events of the transcriptional factors) between ON and OFF states cannot
be ignored, unless the switching is operating in the extremely fast limit compared to any other reactions, known as the
\adiabatic regime" [25{27]. In the other cases|the non-adiabatic regime|gene switching can completely dominate
the dynamics in the network [25, 28]. Eukaryotic gene regulatory networks are often found in the intermediate regime
where gene switching events are dynamically interwoven with the rest of the reactions in the network and cannot be
ignored [5, 29]. Single-cell studies of mESC in particular have shown bursty behavior in gene expression with sudden
jumps in levels of proteins resulting in multi-modal distributions of core transcription factors [7].
Many of the early computational models of embryonic stem cells have focused on small fragments of pluripotency
network, typically involving bistable switches [10, 30]. These early pioneering studies have yielded many insights5
on stochastic decision making in regards to fate determination and self-renewal. A few studied have looked at
larger portions of the regulatory network [31{34] but at the cost of making near-adiabatic switching approximations
thereby ignoring explicit stochastic treatment of genetic switching dynamics. Lastly, with very few exceptions, the
kinetic parameters in those models were not throughly explored or data-informed and had to be picked relying on
physical intuition alone. All of these limitations have been completely overcome in the present work. A series of
recent studies [22{25, 35, 36] on gene expression dynamics have developed a novel computational framework utilizing
piecewise-deterministic Markov process (PDMP) [37] as approximations to the fully individual-based model. This
approach treats genetic switching events exactly, while assuming noise due to the nite nature of populations of
transcription factors to be small in comparison. As will soon be seen, the assumptions underlying the PDMP approach
turn out to be sound as we go on to obtain a nearly perfect quantitative agreement with full blown kinetic Monte
Carlo schemes even for the case of the complex networks of ESC operating in the intermediate gene switching regime.
The PDMP simulations carried out in the present study show nearly O(103) fold faster generating stochastic
trajectories compared to conventional individual-based kinetic Monte Carlo techniques (the algorithm for generating
PDMP sample paths is provided in the Supplementary Information). This rigorous and rapid sampling of gene
switching events has not only allowed us to investigate the stochastic dynamics of the regulatory network at a longer
timescale compared to conventional kinetic Monte Carlo methods, but also enabled us to explore a vast parameter space
eciently. We have used the obtained information to derive microscopic resolution models of ESC. The mathematical
details of the model described in greater detail can be found in the SI.
III. RESULTS
A. In the pluripotent state the mean levels of gene expression are a hardwired feature of network
architecture whereas heterogeneity is shaped signicantly by stochastic dynamics of genetic switches.
In this section we rst identify certain parameters which provide results which are consistent experiment. Following
this the model becomes predictive about dynamical features which are not contained in the topology.
Having reduced the individual-based model to a computationally tractable PDMP, we are at a point where we can
tune the model parameters to match experimental data. The experimental data used for constraining the rate coe-
cients are the binarized gene expression levels of transcription factors under well-dened culture conditions consisting
of dierent combinations of leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), glycogen synthase kinase 3 (CH), and mitogen-activated
protein kinase (PD). Identical culture conditions were used by Dunn et al. [13] to infer the original Boolean topology
are LIF, 2i (same as PD+CH), LIF+2i, LIF+PD, LIF+CH. We employ the Hamming distance (the number of discrep-
ancies between the simulated and experimental proles) as a cost-function for optimization. The Hamming distance
is minimized through multiple rounds of simulations where we vary the three free parameters: the rates of promoter
bindingkonand dissociation ko, and the basal transcription rate m. Through this procedure we nd that, in certain
parameter regimes, our assumed molecular logic closely reproduces the gene expression proles from experiments
for dierent combinations of external signals. The dimeric binding|modeled in our framework as two binding sites
(n= 2)|of TF to promoter sites in particular leads to a more sensitive switching and emerges as an important feature
of the network which we show to be advantageous for reproducing experimental data [38]. We nd localized parameter
sets in three distinct regimes of gene switching: slow, intermediate and fast; all of which successfully reproduce the
experimental gene expression patterns (Fig. 2) corresponding to pluripotent and lineage committed cells. The fact
that the rate parameters of the network occupy nite regions and cover dierent regimes suggests that distinct gene
expression proles can tolerate uctuations in reaction rates. Such rate uctuations, reecting the eect of extrinsic
noise, are inevitable in dynamic cellular environments of embryonic cells which experience frequent epigenetic and
extracellular perturbations [16, 39, 40]. In a way changes in gene switching rates can be seen as a proxy for how global
epigenetic changes govern the rates of transcription factor binding to target genomic regions.
From the methodology point of view the absence of a unique regime of rates implies the following: inferring
networks using only mean levels of gene expression (as is done for Boolean networks) may lead to the loss of valuable
information contained in higher moments of distribution. Thus new approaches of inference need to be developed in
order to account for broad distributions of transcription factors. For this reason, we look beyond comparisons of mean
expression levels and turn to comparing stationary distributions of transcription factors observed in experiments with
the computationally generated distributions in three chosen parameter regimes identied in Fig. 2. The pluripotent
state of mESCs has been the subject of intense investigations by nucleic acid-based single-cell techniques such as RNA-
seq, sm-FISH, qPCR and there is now extensive data on the steady state distributions of RNA and transcription
factors maintained under pluripotency-favoring culture conditions [7, 8, 41]. These experiments have revealed a
heterogeneous nature of gene expression with many core pluripotency factors, such as Nanog, having long tailed or
bimodal distributions. Additionally, the single-cell stochastic trajectories of TFs have shown sharp, bursty transitions6
FIG. 3. Gene expression proles of pluripotency factors predicted by PDMP simulations. Each column corresponds to dierent
external inputs, and each row corresponds to regimes of slow, intermediate and fast gene switching. More than 105sample
paths were used for generating each condition.
implying infrequent genetic switching events [7]. These experimental observations are more consistent with the
intermediate regime of genetic switching as seen from Fig. 3, as in the case of slow switching nearly all of the
transcription factors express bimodality and in the case of fast switching the expressions of all the factors are narrow
and unimodal.
Although the PDMP approach accurately captures the eects of genetic switching, it assumes demographic noise
arising from nite populations to be negligible. To test the validity of this assumption and assess the contribution of
dierent sources of noise in establishing the steady state distribution of the pluripotent state, we carry out individual-
based simulations for the intermediate switching regime of the network, Fig 4. In the individual-based model all
reactions are treated stochastically thereby accounting for all of the sources of noise in the system. The resulting gene
expression proles follow closely those obtained by PDMP simulations, showing that the noise arising from stochastic
switching events of promoter conguration accounts for the signicant part of overall variability in the network.
Trajectories of individual transcription factors show that indeed most of the variance in the the molecular distributions
are generated by genetic switching events which appear as abrupt stochastic jumps. Consistent with experiments,
we also nd that under LIF gene expression is more heterogeneous than under 2i, but also that the overall levels
of expression are higher [7, 8]. In all three regimes of genetic switching supporting pluripotency (LIF+2i,LIF+PD,
LIF+CH, LIF and 2i), core transcriptions factors such as Nanog, Oct4, Sox2 are highly expressed. The same factors
are also repressed in conditions favoring dierentiation (CH, PD and none) irrespective of gene switching regime. This
shows that the pluripotent and dierentiated states, as determined by the pattern of gene expression, are hardwired
in the architecture of the genetic network independent of genetic switching rates. Nevertheless, as we will show in the
next section, the routes and dynamics of lineage commitment from pluripotent states strongly depend on the level of
molecular noise generated in dierent gene switching regimes.
B. Dynamics of lineage commitment is driven by gene switching induced bifurcations of the underlying
landscape of gene expression.
We next ask how the steady state gene expression patterns displayed by the gene network respond to extracellular
perturbations in the form of initiation or termination of pluripotency signals. Both dual inhibitor 2i (PD+CH) and7
FIG. 4. Gene expression proles of pluripotency factors predicted by individual-based simulations. The intermediate switching
regime is chosen to be presented as it is the regime which best captures the experimentally measured distributions [7, 8].
(A) Shown are 100 representative trajectories and full distributions of select few transcription factors under three dierent
conditions generated by individual based simulations. (B) Gene expression prole showing the near quantitative agreement
with results of PDMP simulations shown on Fig. 3 (C) Comparison of individual based model with experimental data from
Dunn et al [13]
Leukemia factor LIF based signaling have been shown to provide a stable environment for maintaining pluripotency
of stem cells in vitro [3, 13]. Conversely, withdrawal of either LIF or 2i leads to irreversible lineage commitment
after a 24-hour period. Despite a similar ability to guard pluripotent cells against lineage commitment, these factors
deploy dierent regulatory mechanisms reected in distinct distributions of pluripotency factors. As a result, stem cell
dierentiation by withdrawal of dierent signals proceeds via dierent routes. To gain a mechanistic understanding
of how the interplay of signaling, molecular noise and network architecture give rise to the steady state expression
proles, we study the dynamics of transitioning between the pluripotent and lineage committed states induced by
rapid initiation and withdrawal of signaling conditions (LIF, CH, PD).
The temporal evolution of distributions of the TFs exiting (LIF/2i withdrawal) and entering (LIF/2i immersion)
pluripotent states reveals rich dynamical signatures of these transitions (Fig 5). To reveal the role of stochasticity in
these transitions, we compare the intermediate regime|which is dominated by genetic switching|to the fast regime|
in which transitions are largely governed by the network topology and the uctuation of promoter conguration is
almost-completely ignored. The irreversible nature of transitions manifests clearly in dierent routes exiting and
entering the pluripotent state (transitions to and from the None state in Fig 5).
In the intermediate regime of genetic switching rates, expression noise greatly facilitates transitions out of a pluripo-
tent state by making the network more responsive to changes in environmental signaling. In contrast, in the fast
switching regime, upon withdrawal of pluripotency signals the downstream regulation happens on a much slower
time-scale with some factors remaining virtually unresponsive to changes of signaling. This signaling enhancement
in the intermediate regime reveals the importance of molecular noise in making pluripotent states more sensitive to8
FIG. 5. The dynamical behavior of the distributions of transcription factor densities for the intermediate and fast switching
regimes. At time t= 0, the external inputs are changed. The plots show the evolution in probability density for a large
ensemble (105) of PDMP sample paths.
environmental conditions. There are qualitatively dierent patterns of re-entrance into pluripotent states upon LIF vs
2i addition, with LIF being much more ecient at reversing pluripotency compared to the 2i. The dierent potential
of signaling culture for pluripotency reversal has been established in experiments [3] which have shown that in the
later stages of commitment only the LIF is able to reverse lineage-primed cells back to their naive pluripotent states.
The exit and re-entrance from pluripotency upon withdrawal/addition of LIF shows complex signatures of hysteresis
and bifurcations. This suggests that there can be multiple pathways of entering or exiting pluripotency. The tran-
sition times for all signaling-induced changes of the steady states of the network are visualized on a kinetic diagram
(Fig 6). The kinetic diagram shows an underlying structure to these transitions where conversion among pluripotent
states takes place with lower \activation barriers" compared to transitions accompanying loss of pluripotency. In the
intermediate switching regime there is a clear time-scale separation between transitions which keep cells in pluripotent
states and transitions out of pluripotent states. One may argue that such a time-scale separation between signals
inducing dierentiation and pluripotency allows embryonic cells to execute developmental decisions more faithfully.
In the fast switching regime this clear time-scale separation is partially lost where only the loss of all three signals is
separated from the rest of the transitions.
Detailed analysis of individual distributions and trajectories of transcription factors can be very informative due
to their high information content. It is, however, not immediately clear how changes in the expression of individual
genes contribute to global changes corresponding to dierent phenotypic transitions. To reveal such global changes,
we project stochastic trajectories of all transcription factors onto the rst two eigenvectors obtained by principal
component analysis of the reference pluripotent steady state (LIF+2i). Most of the variance of transcription factors
is well captured by the few principal components. The high-dimensional steady state of the cellular network can thus
be conveniently projected onto a 2-dimensional subspace, allowing us to visualize the attractor states of the network
as probability landscapes (PC1;PC 2) which are often masked by heterogeneous distributions.
Comparing these probability landscapes with dierent gene switching regimes reveals the distinct roles played by
gene switching-induced molecular noise and the deterministic network topology in guiding the transition out of the
pluripotent states (Fig 7). The intermediate gene switching regime, once again, appears to be the more viable regime
underlying pluripotent states since the probability landscape shows up as a broad attractor with interconnected states.
Going towards the limit of slow switching results in the fragmentation of the landscape into states separated by high
barriers. This gene switching-induced remodeling of attractors shows the potential for regulation via global epigenetic
changes which are purported to act via silencing or activating entire sets of genes at once. Thus one may view gene
switching rates as a proxy for genome wide acetylation/methylation patterns which can dramatically alter the access
of transcription factors to key target genomic sites. The sequential removal of pluripotency inducing signals reveals9
FastswitchingIntermediateswitching
Intermediate switching: Stochastic regimeFast switching: Near-deterministic regime
FIG. 6. Calculations of transition times between the stationary distributions of dierent external conditions. A larger, darker
arrow indicates that a given transition takes a longer time to converge to its stationary state. This time-scale is measured by
simulating a large ensemble (105) of PDMP sample paths to provide a simulated probability density, and nding the Jensen{
Shannon divergence [42, 43] between the instantaneous distribution of each TF and its nal stationary distribution. The time
for the each divergence to fall below a threshold (:= 0 :3) is recorded, and we choose the largest of these as a quantication of
the transition time.
a consistent change in the size of the attractor towards occupying smaller regions on the landscape. This argues for
the physical state of network corresponding to pluripotent states to be the one with maximal variance of regulatory
transcription factors where lineage commitment is accompanied by their gradual constraining and repression. A
similar idea which views pluripotency as a macrostate emerging from an ensemble of cells which try to maximizes
the information entropy with respect to regulatory transcription factors has been postulated before [12, 44]. The
analysis of steady state stochastic dynamics of pluripotency network in this work appears in agreement with his
view. Furthermore, we are able to reveal the microscopic origin of this entropic paradigm. By analyzing pairwise
correlation among dierent transcription factors we nd that signals like LIF/2i create greater independence between
the expression of core transcription factors leading them to explore larger range of values. Hence, removal of these
signals leads to more constrained and inter-dependent patterns of gene expression for the same transcription factors
which greatly diminishes overall variance. (Fig S1).
IV. DISCUSSION
Recent studies of ESC have increasingly emphasized systems level perspective on pluripotency and fate determina-
tion as outcomes of complex biological computations orchestrated by non-random networks of genes [45, 46]. Rapid
growth of gene expression data collected from controllable in vitro experiments on mESCs has made it possible to make
reliable inferences of gene regulatory networks which govern the state of pluripotency [13]. These inferences show a
highly interconnected nature of regulatory networks where signaling molecules, genomic binding, epigenetics and bio-
chemical feedback act in a concerted manner in balancing pluripotency and decision making. Single-cell experiments
have also revealed signicant dynamic heterogeneity of gene expression in the population of cells [7, 8], suggesting
the important roles played by molecular noise and non-equilibrium processes. Schematic network topology models
are no longer sucient for rationalizing the level of detailed quantitative information obtained in single-cell studies.
In the present work we have developed a multi-scale computational scheme for converting experimentally-inferred
boolean topologies into quantitative and predictive models of networks with microscopic resolution of gene expression
dynamics. The employed computational model is based on previously proposed hybrid stochastic approaches [22{25]
in which the switching dynamics of individual genes are considered exactly while the rest of the biochemical reactions
are approximated as deterministic. This hybrid stochastic approach is approximately a thousand fold faster than con-
ventional kinetic Monte Carlo methods. This allows us to simulate large scale gene regulatory networks of ESC under
dierent culture conditions and gene switching regimes. To infer the parameters in the model from the experimental
data, we use hybrid simulations to exhaustively sample the space of rates and identify the parameter regime in which
the model prediction best matches experimental data. The approximation using the hybrid scheme is validated by
carrying out fully stochastic simulations of the network for the identied parameter sets. This agreement also shows10
Fast switchingIntermediate switchingSlow switchingLIF+2iLIF2iNone
0.01.0⇡(PC1,PC2)
FIG. 7. Mapping the cellular attractors of genetic network under dierent switching and signaling conditions by projecting
PDMP simulated gene expression onto rst two principal components. The reference state for principal components was chosen
to be the LIF+2i/intermediate switching.
that the switching events of genes|due to stochastic TFs binding to the promoter sites|to be a signicant source of
variance in the ESC networks. Furthermore we see the changes in gene switching rates as a proxy for global epigenetic
modications that can alter the rates of access of transcription factors to sites buried under chromatin structures.
Thus the signicant remodeling of steady state landscape that we see by varying the global gene switching rates gives
us a glimpse of potentially powerful leverage that epigenetic changes of chromatin have over stability of pluripotent
states.
We nd that the intermediate regime, in which gene switching rate is comparable to the other reaction rates in
the network, is most consistent with single-cell measurements [7{9]. In this regime transcription factors show bursty
dynamics which lead to heterogeneous distributions with some showing long tailed and bimodal features. We nd
signaling by LIF and 2i to be a major driving force maintaining the stability of pluripotent states. Withdrawal of
either LIF/2i initiates lineage commitment via a robust pattern of reduced expression of Nanog/Oct4/Sox2 triad.
To characterize the dynamics of lineage commitment, we compute transition times from pluripotent to dierentiated
steady states. We nd that higher levels of molecular noise generated by slower gene switching make network more
responsive to changes in signaling condition. Next, by carrying out principal component analysis on ensembles of
gene expression proles, we nd a much simpler description of pluripotency and lineage commitment in terms of
eective probability landscapes. As the signals safeguarding pluripotency are removed, these landscapes reveal a
gradual narrowing of the steady state attractor explored by the network. Thus, we see a hierarchical organization
of dierentiation landscapes where pluripotent states pose the largest attractor which is maintained through the
extracellular signals and the molecular noise of gene switching.
At last we believe the computational framework developed here should also be useful in organize and interpreting
experimental data of other complex gene regulatory networks within a coherent and unied computational models
thereby making it easier to conceive and vet physical hypothesis in a systematic way. Given the rapid rise of information
from high throughput single-cell nucleic acid based techniques (RNA-seq, RNA-FISH, qPCR, etc), we expect such
microscopic resolution models to play important roles for bridging the systems-level behavior of genetic networks with
the underlying molecular-level processes of binding and regulation at the genomic sites.
[1] M. Evans, Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12, 680 (2011).
[2] C. E. Murry and G. Keller, Cell 132, 661 (2008).11
[3] G. Martello and A. Smith, Ann Rev Cell Dev Biol 30, 647 (2014).
[4] N. G. Van Kampen, Stochastic processes in physics and chemistry , Vol. 1 (Elsevier, 1992).
[5] O. Symmons and A. Raj, Mol cell 62, 788 (2016).
[6] G. Bal azsi, A. van Oudenaarden, and J. J. Collins, Cell 144, 910 (2011).
[7] Z. S. Singer, J. Yong, J. Tischler, J. A. Hackett, A. Altinok, M. A. Surani, L. Cai, and M. B. Elowitz, Molecular cell 55,
319 (2014).
[8] R. M. Kumar, P. Cahan, A. K. Shalek, R. Satija, A. J. DaleyKeyser, H. Li, J. Zhang, K. Pardee, D. Gennert, J. J.
Trombetta, et al. , Nature 516, 56 (2014).
[9] M. A. Canham, A. A. Sharov, M. S. Ko, and J. M. Brickman, PLoS Biol 8, e1000379 (2010).
[10] T. Kalmar, C. Lim, P. Hayward, S. Mu~ noz-Descalzo, J. Nichols, J. Garcia-Ojalvo, and A. M. Arias, PLoS Biol 7, e1000149
(2009).
[11] S. Masui, Y. Nakatake, Y. Toyooka, D. Shimosato, R. Yagi, K. Takahashi, H. Okochi, A. Okuda, R. Matoba, A. A. Sharov,
et al. , Nature cell biology 9, 625 (2007).
[12] B. D. MacArthur and I. R. Lemischka, Cell 154, 484 (2013).
[13] S.-J. Dunn, G. Martello, B. Yordanov, S. Emmott, and A. Smith, Science 344, 1156 (2014).
[14] J. Feigelman, S. Ganscha, S. Hastreiter, M. Schwarzscher, A. Filipczyk, T. Schroeder, F. J. Theis, C. Marr, and
M. Claassen, Cell Sys 3, 480 (2016).
[15] H. Xu, Y.-S. Ang, A. Sevilla, I. R. Lemischka, and A. Ma'ayan, PLoS Comput Biol 10, e1003777 (2014).
[16] S. Semrau and A. van Oudenaarden, Ann Rev Cell Dev Biol 31, 317 (2015).
[17] L. Ferraris, A. P. Stewart, J. Kang, A. M. DeSimone, M. Gemberling, D. Tantin, and W. G. Fairbrother, Genome Res
21, 1055 (2011).
[18] We have also tested n= 3;4;5 showing qualitatively similar results to n= 2.
[19] P. C. Bresslo, Stochastic processes in cell biology , Vol. 41 (Springer, 2014).
[20] T. B. Kepler and T. C. Elston, Biophysical journal 81, 3116 (2001).
[21] J. Hornos, D. Schultz, G. Innocentini, J. Wang, A. Walczak, J. Onuchic, and P. Wolynes, Phys Rev E 72, 051907 (2005).
[22] Y. T. Lin and T. Galla, Journal of The Royal Society Interface 13, 20150772 (2016).
[23] Y. T. Lin and C. R. Doering, Physical Review E 93, 022409 (2016).
[24] P. G. Hufton, Y. T. Lin, T. Galla, and A. J. McKane, Physical Review E 93, 052119 (2016).
[25] D. A. Potoyan and P. G. Wolynes, The Journal of chemical physics 143, 195101 (2015).
[26] A. M. Walczak, J. N. Onuchic, and P. G. Wolynes, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 102, 18926 (2005).
[27] M. Sasai and P. G. Wolynes, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 100, 2374 (2003).
[28] H. Feng, B. Han, and J. Wang, The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 115, 1254 (2010).
[29] T. L. Lenstra, J. Rodriguez, H. Chen, and D. R. Larson, Ann Rev Biophys (2016).
[30] V. Chickarmane, C. Troein, U. A. Nuber, H. M. Sauro, and C. Peterson, PLoS Comput Biol 2, e123 (2006).
[31] J. Wang, K. Zhang, L. Xu, and E. Wang, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, 8257 (2011).
[32] C. Li and J. Wang, Journal of The Royal Society Interface 10, 20130787 (2013).
[33] B. Zhang and P. G. Wolynes, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111, 10185 (2014).
[34] H. Feng and J. Wang, Scientic reports 2, 550 (2012).
[35] S. Zeiser, U. Franz, O. Wittich, and V. Liebscher, IET systems biology 2, 113 (2008).
[36] S. Zeiser, U. Franz, and V. Liebscher, Journal of Mathematical Biology 60, 207 (2010).
[37] M. H. Davis, J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 46, 353 (1984).
[38] Our analysis showing n2 signicantly reduces the Hamming distance, compared to a single-site binding n= 1.
[39] M.-E. Torres-Padilla and I. Chambers, Development 141, 2173 (2014).
[40] H. Ochiai, T. Sugawara, T. Sakuma, and T. Yamamoto, Scientic reports 4, 7125 (2014).
[41] A. M. Klein, L. Mazutis, I. Akartuna, N. Tallapragada, A. Veres, V. Li, L. Peshkin, D. A. Weitz, and M. W. Kirschner,
Cell161, 1187 (2015).
[42] J. Lin, IEEE Transactions on Information theory 37, 145 (1991).
[43] D. M. Endres and J. E. Schindelin, IEEE Transactions on Information theory 49, 1858 (2003).
[44] S. J. Ridden, H. H. Chang, K. C. Zygalakis, and B. D. MacArthur, Physical review letters 115, 208103 (2015).
[45] B. D. MacArthur, A. Ma'ayan, and I. R. Lemischka, Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 10, 672 (2009).
[46] S. Kontogeorgaki, R. Sanchez-Garcia, R. Ewing, K. Zygalakis, and B. D. MacArthur, bioRxiv , 075366 (2016).