Title: Stem Cell Networks
Abstract:   We present a general computational theory of stem cell networks and their
developmental dynamics. Stem cell networks are special cases of developmental
control networks. Our theory generates a natural classification of all possible
stem cell networks based on their network architecture. Each stem cell network
has a unique topology and semantics and developmental dynamics that result in
distinct phenotypes. We show that the ideal growth dynamics of multicellular
systems generated by stem cell networks have mathematical properties related to
the coefficients of Pascal's Triangle. The relationship to cancer stem cells
and their control networks is indicated. The theory lays the foundation for a
new research paradigm for understanding and investigating stem cells. The
theory of stem cell networks implies that new methods for generating and
controlling stem cells will become possible.

Full Text: Stem Cell Networks
Eric Werner∗
University of Oxford
Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics,
and Department of Computer Science,
Le Gros Clark Building, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QX
email: eric.werner@dpag.ox.ac.uk
Abstract
We present a general computational theory of stem cell networks and their de-
velopmental dynamics. Stem cell networks are special cases of developmental
control networks. Our theory generates a natural classiﬁcation of all possible
stem cell networks based on their network architecture. Each stem cell network
has a unique topology and semantics and developmental dynamics that result in
distinct phenotypes. We show that the ideal growth dynamics of multicellular sys-
tems generated by stem cell networks have mathematical properties related to the
coecients of Pascal’s Triangle. The relationship to cancer stem cells and their
control networks is indicated. The theory lays the foundation for a new research
paradigm for understanding and investigating stem cells. The theory of stem cell
networks implies that new methods for generating and controlling stem cells will
become possible.
Key words :stem cells, stem cell networks, cene, cenome, developmental control net-
works, cancer stem cells, stochastic stem cell networks, stochastic cancer stem cell net-
works, metastatic hierarchy, linear networks, geometric cancer networks, systems biology,
computational biology, multiagent systems, muticellular modeling, simulation, cancer mod-
eling, cancer simulation
∗Balliol Graduate Centre, Oxford Advanced Research Foundation (http: //oarf.org), Cellnomica, Inc.
(http: //cellnomica.com). We gratefully acknowledge the use of Cellnomica’s Software Suite to construct the can-
cer and stem cell networks used to model and simulate all the multicellular processes that generated the in silico
cancers described and illustrated in this paper. ©Werner 2016. All rightsreserved.arXiv:1607.04502v1  [q-bio.OT]  11 Jul 2016Eric Werner, Stem cell networks i
Contents
1 Introduction 1
1.1 Developmental control networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.2 Deﬁnitions: Two kinds of stem cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.2.1 Iteropotent stem cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.2.2 Transpotent stem cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.2.3 Relations between transpotency and iteropotency of stem cells . . . . . 3
1.3 The graphical network formalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.4 Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2 A hierarchy of stem cell networks 4
2.1 First order linear stem cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.2 Second order geometric meta-stem cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.3 3rd-Order stem cell networks NG 3with 3 loops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.4 Meta-stem cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.5 Geometric stem cell networks NG kwith kloops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.6 Mathematical properties of geometric stem cell networks . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
3 Stem cell production in development 10
3.1 Multi-identical linear stem cell network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2 Stem cells that generate identical cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.3 Stem cell networks commute with identical cell networks . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4 Stem cell networks and cancer stem cells 12
4.1 Normal stem cells and cancer stem cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2 Cancer susceptibility of stem cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
5 Hierarchy of metastases from geometric cancer networks 14
5.1 Secondary and tertiary metastases generated by 3rd order cancer networks . . 16
5.2 Relating metastatic phenotype with geometric cancer networks . . . . . . . . . 17
5.3 Treatment options for metastases generated by geometric cancer networks . . 17
5.4 Stochastic reactivation of terminal cells in geometric networks . . . . . . . . . 18
6 Stochastic di erentiation in stem cell networks 18
6.1 Historical background: A network that generates Till’s stochastic stem cell model 18
6.2 The Till stochastic network extended to generate progenitor cells . . . . . . . . 21
6.3 A ﬂexible stochastic network architecture with exponential and linear potential 23
6.4 Linear stochastic stem cell network LSSC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6.5 1st-Order Geometric Cancer Networks with open stochastic dedi erentiation . 26
6.6 1st-Order Geometric Cancer Networks with closed stochastic dedi erentiation 26
6.7 Closed exponential stem cell network with stochastic delays . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.8 A 1st order geometric /exponential stochastic stem cell network with stochastic
progenitor cell dedi erentiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28Eric Werner, Stem cell networks ii
6.9 A broad spectrum Linear or 2nd order geometric or exponential stochastic stem
cell network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.10 A Master stochastic geometric and exponential network . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.11 2nd Order Geometric stochastic stem cell network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.12 Geometric stochastic stem cell network with dedi erentiation . . . . . . . . . . 32
6.13 Modeling deterministic stem cell networks with stochastic networks . . . . . . 33
6.14 Transformations of probability distributions change stochastic stem cell behavior 33
7 Communication in stem cell networks 33
7.1 Reactive communication stem cell networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
7.2 A reactive signal based geometric network architecture with 1st and 2nd order
geometric potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
7.3 A pure reactive signal based geometric network architecture with 1st and 2nd
order geometric potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
8 Stem cell networks with interactive communication 35
8.1 Interactive signaling mono generative networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
8.2 Interactive signaling mono-linear network architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
8.3 Dual cancer signaling networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
8.4 A interactive signaling dual linear network architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
9 Hybrid communicative and stochastic stem cell networks 39
10 Discussion: Stem cell concepts 39
10.1 Formal and informal deﬁnitions of transpotency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
10.2 Problems with deﬁnitions of transpotency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
10.3 Conceptual ambiguities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
10.4 Iteropotent versus transpotent stem cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
10.5 Dedi erentiation of daughter cells into stem cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
10.6 Stem cell locality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
10.7 Distinct stem cell concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
10.8 Stem cell classiﬁcation and methods that induce cell di erentiation . . . . . . 45
References 45Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 1
1 Introduction
Stem cells are crucial in embryogenesis as well as maintaining our bodies. They are the source
of tissue regeneration, generating skin, hair, and replacing damaged cells in wound healing.
They are also the source of many cancers. Understanding the nature of stem cells and what
controls them is, therefore, of great importance. The aim of this essay is to understand the
essence of what makes stem cells run. To achieve this we present a general theory of devel-
opmental networks that lie hidden in stem cells and control them. The theory is abstract and
powerful describing the universal principles and architectures that underly all stem cell net-
works. This allows us to model and simulate all stem cell types. And that enables us to do
computational experiments by running di erent networks in virtual stem cells and observing
their behavior in a virtual space-time context of other cells.
(a)G3 OctalTetrahedron.
Fig. 1: Two views of an Octal Tetrahedron. This Octal Tetrahedron was grown from a
single cell. A cell ﬁrst divides symmetrically several times to produce the resulting symmetries
[28]. Then a 3rd order stem cell networks generates a tetrahedron. The result after several
synchronous divisions is what you see. As shown in this article, these stem cell networks
whether cancerous or normal have growth dynamics related to the classical Greek ﬁgurative
numbers and Pascal’s triangle.
The result is a deep understanding of the properties of real stem cells and their controlling
networks. It also gives us a profound insight into the nature of the role of cancer stem cells in
metastases. The theory predicts that there exists a metastatic hierarchy that corresponds directly
to the stem cell network hierarchy. We will describe the stem cell network hierarchy and show
that this network hierarchy has direct causal links to this previously unknown hierarchy of
metastases. This has important implications for the classiﬁcation, diagnosis and treatment
of metastases in cancer. The theory also implies that it is in principle possible to constructEric Werner, Stem cell networks 2
methodologies that can transform cancer stem cell networks into a harmless form giving us the
potential to ultimately cure and even eliminate such cancers.
1.1 Developmental control networks
We postulate that multicellular development is controlled by networks. We call these networks
developmental control networks orcenes for control genes. The global developmental control
network is the entire network that controls the development of an organism. This global cene
is sometimes called the cenome [26].
Stem cell networks form a subclass of developmental networks. They have a well deﬁned
network architectures with a range of topologies. We will show that stem cell networks form a
hierarchy based on their network topology. The properties of stem cells are determined by the
properties of their network architecture. It is the network architecture that gives stem cells their
primary deﬁning property, namely, the capacity to self-renew while generating an unlimited set
of progeny of various cell types. The network locality determines the stem cell maturity and the
capacity of its progeny to di erentiate to various cell types. Thus, the potency of a stem cell’s
daughter cell is determined by the locality of that stem cell network in the global developmental
network.
1.2 Deﬁnitions: Two kinds of stem cells
We distinguish two independent properties of stem cells: Self-renewal (iteropotency) and the
capacity to transform into various cell types (transpotency). These two properties are often
confused in the scientiﬁc and popular science literature.
1.2.1 Iteropotent stem cells
We deﬁne a cell to be iteropotent if it has the capacity of self-renewal. When an iteropotent
stem cell divides it generates two daughter cells, one that has the same control state as the
parent and one that is in a new developmental control state. The developmental control state
of a cell is deﬁned by the set nodes in the developmental network that are active in that cell.
Examples of self-renewing, iteropotent stem cells are skin (epithelial) and hair stem cells,
bone marrow stem cells, and cancer stem cells. Aniteropotent cells are by deﬁnition non-self-
renewing cells.
1.2.2 Transpotent stem cells
We deﬁne a cell to be transpotent if it has the capacity to di erentiate into other cell types. The
degree of transpotency is the variety and number of cell types into which a transpotent cell can
dierentiate. Transpotent stem cells are usually, roughly classiﬁed into embryonic, totipotent,Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 3
pluripotent, and oligopotent stem cells. Transpotency may be conditional and context depen-
dent. Natural transpotency is a natural, inherent property of the cell. It is the natural property
of a cell to transform itself based on its context and developmental network state. Artiﬁcial
transpotency is an artiﬁcial, experimentally induced property of cells that would not naturally
occur.
1.2.3 Relations between transpotency and iteropotency of stem cells
Because self-renewal and transpotency are orthogonal properties of cells they can occur in any
combination: A transpotent stem cell need not have the capacity of self-renewal even though
it may generate stem cells that do have that capacity. So too, the two properties of stem cells
can coexist in the same cell. For example, a self-renewing stem cell may also be transpotent,
but if it di erentiates it may or may not retain its property of self-renewal. Finally, a self-
renewing stem cell may may not be transpotent and yet generate transpotent cells. All these
dierent cases can be more precisely deﬁned and modeled by di erent developmental stem cell
networks.
1.3 The graphical network formalism
We will use an abstract graphical network language to describe developmental networks. Dif-
ferential equations are often used to describe the quantitative output of cell proliferation. While
our graphical networks can in part be reductively formalized by di erential equations, such re-
ductions loose many of the architectural properties and advantages of graphical developmental
networks. A good deal of theoretical and practical insight is lost in reductions to di erential
equations. Since many of the biological parameters and molecular implementation of stem
cell networks is still unknown and perhaps never will be fully known, graphical representa-
tion languages of developmental networks help us to understand developmental processes and
may even enable us to control developmental processes without necessarily knowing or under-
standing their full molecular implementation. This is not to say that modeling attempts with
dierential equations is not worthwhile. Indeed, we use di erential equations to model the
physics of cell interactions. One goal is to link up lower level di erential equation formalisms
of molecular networks with our higher level abstract graphical representations of developmen-
tal control networks. Any cooperations to this end are welcomed by the author.
1.4 Plan
The main focus of this essay will be on self-renewing, iteropotent stem cell networks. We
ﬁrst look at deterministic stem cell networks. We describe meta-stem cell networks and their
mathematical properties. We discover a stem cell hierarchy of networks and show that their
proliferative properties are related to the geometric numbers and the coe cients of Pascal’s
Triangle. Next, we describe the close relationship between normal stem cell networks andEric Werner, Stem cell networks 4
cancer stem cell networks. We apply the theory of the hierarchy of stem cell networks to
metastases. We show that there is a direct correspondence between the stem cell network
hierarchy and a metastatic hierarchy. The theory of a hierarchy of metastases makes testable
predictions and has signiﬁcant implications for cancer diagnosis and treatment. We then add
stochasticity to stem cell networks and investigate the range of stochastic stem cell networks.
It turns out that adding stochasticity makes stem cell networks extremely ﬂexible. Next, we
add cell communication to stem cell networks. Finally, we combine deterministic, stochastic
and communication stem cell networks.
2 A hierarchy of stem cell networks
Traditionally, stem cells have been viewed as cells that endlessly self-regenerate while produc-
ing terminal daughter cells of some type regulated by some terminal developmental network.
However, there may exist stem cells produce other stem cells. We refer to stem cells that
produce stem cells as meta-stem cells or as higher order stem cells . The order of a stem cell
depends on the number of linear loops in its developmental control network. A 3rd-order stem
cell network contains three loops and produces 2nd-order and 1st-order stem cells. In turn, a
2nd-order stem cell network contains two loops and produces only 1st-order stem cells. 1st-
order stem cells are controlled by single loop and produce terminal cells or cells with limited
proliferative potential. Cells with limited proliferative potential that can engage in a small
number of further divisions are called progenitor cells . We will see that stem cell networks
have proliferation or growth potential related to the geometric numbers and the coe cients of
Pascal’s Triangle. Without preconditions in an idealized setting without physical constraints,
ak−th order stem cell network would have the proliferations properties of an k-th order ge-
ometric network (see 2.5). We will thus sometimes refer to stem cell networks as geometric
networks when emphasizing their geometric growth properties and to distinguish them from
exponential networks (Werner [27]).
2.1 First order linear stem cells
A ﬁrst order stem cell produces no additional stem cells. Instead a ﬁrst order stem cell A
produces cells Bthat is in a di erent control state than its parent cell A. The stem cell thus
produces one daughter cell that inherits the control state of its parent which is Aitself and one
daughter cell Bthat is in a new control state. Thus stem cells have a self reﬂexive control
system. Note, that the cell Bmay still be multi-potent in that it may be controlled by a network
that generates a whole multicellular system.
First order stem cells have conditional control networks. This means that their activation de-
pends on not just being linked into another network that activates them but that they can only
be active if the conditions are satisﬁed.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 5
1→A1 B
1
Fig. 2: Network G1: 1st Order (Linear) Stem Cell Network The cell of type A1is a regular
stem cell that divides conditionally. If condition 1hold, then A1produces cells of type B.
One daughter of A1self loops giving a daughter cell of the same cell type A1as the parent. The
other daughter cell di erentiates to type B. The a stem cell controlled by this network exhibits
slow, linear growth. The proliferation potential is given by Equation 2.7.
In terms of network topology, ﬁrst order stem cells are similar to ﬁrst order geometric cancer
networks in that both contain one loop Werner [27] They contain one loop and generate cells
linearly, one at a time. The newly generated cells Bare terminal cells that do not prolifer-
ate or they may be progenitor cells that are controlled by a terminal developmental network
(see Werner [27, 26] for more on developmental control networks, stem cell and cancer net-
works. The cells Bmay also be transpotent cells that can be induced naturally or artiﬁcially to
dierentiate into various cell types.
2.2 Second order geometric meta-stem cells
Basic ﬁrst order stem cells can only produce terminal cells. A ﬁrst order stem cell cannot
generate any further stem cells and a regular developmental network that links to a single stem
cell network will only generate one stem cell. Thus, to produce multiple stem cells we need
another type of developmental network. One way multiple stem cells can be produced is by
networks of the type NI k(Fig. 7) that could produce 2kidentical ﬁrst order stem cells. But this
is still limited by number of loops kin those networks. Another method is to have meta-stem
cell networks that can endlessly produce 1st order stem cells. It is possible that organisms use
both strategies.
Thus, there are at least two methods of producing stem cells. A developmental network may
link to a stem cell network to generate one or more stem cells. Or there are meta-stem cells that
can produce an unlimited supply of stem cells. A third method uses stochastic dedi erentiation
of terminal or progenitor cells to their 1st order stem cell parent network. ([27]).
Meta-stem cells, like ﬁrst order stem cells, can also have conditional activation in that being
linked into another network is not su cient for their potential activation. Their preconditions
2must be satisﬁed at each pass of the loop to execute the next loop. In the case of cancer
stem cells the preconditions may be permanently switched on or they may be null.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 6
2→A2 1→A1 B C
1 2 1
Fig. 3: Second order, meta-stem cell network NG 2:The cell A2is ameta-stem cell that
given condition 2holds, produces stem cells of type A1which in turn conditionally produces
cells of type B. Thus, the cell of type A1is a regular stem cell. If condition 1hold, then A1
produces cells of type B. When their preconditions are satisﬁed, both A2andA1proliferate
linearly such that the joint proliferation potential is given by Equation 2.10.
2.3 3rd-Order stem cell networks NG 3with 3loops
Adding another loop to a meta-stem cell network results in a meta-meta-stem cell network or
third order stem cell network.
A3 A2 A1 D
2 1 3 2 1
Fig. 4: Network NG 3A 3rd-Order Stem Cell Network: A stem cell network 3 loops: The
proliferation potential is give by Equation 2.13. Each cell of type Ai,i<3, is a higher order
meta-stem cell; it produces stem cells of type Ai−1. Thus, cell type A3is a meta-meta-stem cell
that produces meta-stem cells of type A2, etc. The cell type A2is a stem cell that produces a
stem cell A1which in turn produces a non-stem cells of some type D.
2.4 Meta-stem cells
Geometric networks of the above type suggest a new category of stem cells, namely, meta-stem
cells (see subsection 2.2). A linear orﬁrst order stem cell is a cell that produces other cells
(that are not stem cells) by means of a linear developmental network. Meta-stem cells are stem
cells that produce stem cells. Thus a 2nd-order geometric network with two loops contains aEric Werner, Stem cell networks 7
meta-stem cell A2that produces linear stem cells of type A1. A 3rd-order three loop geometric
network contains a meta-meta-stem cellA3that produces meta-stem cells A2that produce stem
cells A1that produce cells of type D. And, so on.
Whether a geometric meta-stem cell network is a cancerours network will depend on the prop-
erties of the cells and how they function in the organism. Any stem cell or meta-stem cell net-
work can by mutations become an exponential cancer (see below). A transformation of linear
stem cell network into a meta-stem cell network will make the stem cell proliferate according
to Equation 2.4 below and be potentially harmful. Indeed, even the metastatic behavior of can-
cer stem cells will be seen to be directly related to the properties of their geometric, meta-stem
cell networks (Sec. 5).
2.5 Geometric stem cell networks NG kwith kloops
Ak Ak−1 A1 D
k−1 k k−1 1
Fig. 5: Network NG k: An k-th order stem cell network: A geometric cancer with kloops:
Each of the cell types Ai,i=k:::1 are cancer cells whose joint proliferation potential is give
by Equation 2.2. Each cell of type Ai,i<k, is a higher order meta-stem cell; it produces stem
cells of type Ai−1. Thus, cell type Akis a meta-stem cell that produces stem cells of type Ak−1,
etc. The cell type A1is a ﬁrst order stem cell that produces regular non-stem cells of type D.
The di erence between stem cells and cancer stem cells has to do with their functionality in
the system as a whole.
2.6 Mathematical properties of geometric stem cell networks
A stem cell network of the above type with one or more loops in a linear connected sequence
leads has interesting mathematical properties. It turns out that such networks are directly re-
lated to Pascal’s Triangle, binomial coe cients and geometric numbers. Under the appropriate
interpretation, one loop simple produces a line. Two loops produce a triangle. Three loops
produce an equilateral pyramid (tetrahedron), four loops a pentalope (a four dimensional pyra-
mid), etc. In general, an network of klinearly connected loops will produce an k-dimensional
pyramid. Or viewed numerically, after nsynchronous rounds of ideal division, a cancer net-
work with klinearly connected single loops produce the sum of the ﬁrst kbinomial coe cients
at level nof Pascal’s triangle.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 8
Recall that by deﬁnition:
/parenleft.alt3n
k/parenright.alt3=n!
k!(n−k)!(2.1)
Then the number of cells produced by a single cell that is controlled by an stem cell network
with klinearly connected loops, after undergoing nrounds of synchronous cell division division
is given by the following formula (for n>0):
Cells(n;k)=k
/summation.disp
i=0/parenleft.alt3n
i/parenright.alt3=k
/summation.disp
i=0n!
i!(n−i)!(2.2)
The above formula shows the direct relationship between such stem cell networks and the
binomial coe cients of Pascal’s triangle, i.e., the coe cients the binomial theorem.
Given the following standard deﬁnitions:
1. Linear number:
Lin(n)=1+n=1+/parenleft.alt3n
1/parenright.alt3when n≥1 (2.3)
2. Triangular number:
Tri(n)=n2+n
2=n(n+1)
2=/parenleft.alt3n+1
2/parenright.alt3 (2.4)
3. Tetrahedral number:
Tet(n)=n(n+1)(n+2)
6=/parenleft.alt3n+2
3/parenright.alt3 (2.5)
4. Pentalope number:
Pen(n)=n(n+1)(n+2)(n+3)
24=/parenleft.alt3n+3
4/parenright.alt3 (2.6)
Then the number of cells, Cells (n;k), that develop after nrounds of synchronous division obey
the sum of the coe cients of Pascal’s Triangle where nis the height of the triangle and kis
horizontal coordinate corresponding to the number of single connected loops in the regulatory
network. These sums correspond to the volumes of the corresponding k-dimensional geometric
form in an ideal k-dimensional discrete space:
1. For one loop we get a 1-dimensional structure where its length gives the number of cells:
Cells (n;1)=Lin(n)=1+n (2.7)
2. Two loops add the triangular number to give the area of a 2-dimensional triangle:
Cells (n;2)=Lin(n)+Tri(n−1) (2.8)
=1+n+n(n−1)
2(2.9)
=2
/summation.disp
i=0/parenleft.alt3n
i/parenright.alt3=/parenleft.alt3n
0/parenright.alt3+/parenleft.alt3n
1/parenright.alt3+/parenleft.alt3n
2/parenright.alt3 (2.10)Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 9
3. For three loops add the tetrahedral number to give the volume of 3-dimensional pyramid:
Cells (n;3)=Lin(n)+Tri(n−1)+Tet(n−2) (2.11)
=1+n+n(n−1)
2+n(n−1)(n−2)
6(2.12)
=2
/summation.disp
i=0/parenleft.alt3n
i/parenright.alt3=/parenleft.alt3n
0/parenright.alt3+/parenleft.alt3n
1/parenright.alt3+/parenleft.alt3n
2/parenright.alt3+/parenleft.alt3n
3/parenright.alt3 (2.13)
4. For four loops add the pentalope number to give the volume of a 4-dimensional pyramid:
Cells (n;4)=Lin(n)+Tri(n−1)+Tet(n−2)+Pen(n−3) (2.14)
=1+n+n(n−1)
2+n(n−1)(n−2)
6+n(n−1)(n−2)(n−3)
24(2.15)
=/parenleft.alt3n
0/parenright.alt3+/parenleft.alt3n
1/parenright.alt3+/parenleft.alt3n
2/parenright.alt3+/parenleft.alt3n
3/parenright.alt3+/parenleft.alt3n
4/parenright.alt3 (2.16)
5. For kloops sum the sequence of numbers throughn!
k!(n−k)!to give the volume of a k-
dimensional pyramid. Given n>0 :
Cells (n;k)=Lin(n)+Tri(n−1)+Tet(n−2)+:::+/parenleft.alt3n
k/parenright.alt3 (2.17)
=1+n+n(n−1)
2+n(n−1)(n−2)
6+⋅⋅⋅+n!
k!(n−k)!(2.18)
=/parenleft.alt3n
0/parenright.alt3+/parenleft.alt3n
1/parenright.alt3+/parenleft.alt3n
2/parenright.alt3+⋅⋅⋅+ /parenleft.alt3n
k/parenright.alt3 (2.19)
=k
/summation.disp
i=0/parenleft.alt3n
i/parenright.alt3=k
/summation.disp
i=0n!
i!(n−i)!(2.20)
6. So, in general we have:
Cells (n;k)=/braceleft.alt41 if n=0
∑k
i=0n!
i!(n−i)!=∑k
i=0/parenleft.alt1n
i/parenright.alt1otherwise(2.21)
This view shows the direct relationship between this type of cancer and stem cell network
and the geometric numbers. What is fascinating is that these ideal networks have a genera-
tive competence with such interesting numerical properties. Their mathematical history spans
back from the binomial theorem, to Pascal’s triangle, to the Greek’s discovery of geometric
numbers.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 10
3 Stem cell production in development
Stem cells are created in a developmental context. This is done by linking in a stem cell
network into the normal developmental network. The locality of origin of the link in the de-
velopmental network to the stem cell network determines the properties of the cells that a stem
cell network generates. For example, heart stem cells are di erent from liver stem cells even if
one can coaxed into assuming the properties of the other.
3.1 Multi-identical linear stem cell network
A linear k-identical cell stem cell network NIkL=NIkG1links an identical cell network NI k
that generates kidentical cells with a downstream linear stem cell network NL=G1. The
simplest case is where the number of identical linear stem cells is k=2:
A B C D
cb
bb
Fig. 6: Network NI1L=NI1G1: A binary-linear stem cell network . An initial network NI 1
is linked to a linear stem cell network G 1. The network NI 1generates 2 identical stem cells
B which are controlled by NL=NG 1. The parent cell Adivides into two identical daughter
stem cells of type B.Bis controlled by a linear self-renewing stem cell sub-network which
generates terminal cells of type C.
If 2 is the number of identical cells controlled by the network and nis the number of loops
synchronously executed by those cells then in this case the number of cells after ncell divisions
is:
Cells (n)=2+(2×n) (3.1)
Thephenotype of such a network would have identical linearly growing stem cells in several
places at once. They would have started simultaneously (up to some error range).
More generally, let NI kbe a network of kidentical divisions that generates 2kcells. Then we
can generate a stem cell network NLI kif we link an upstream NI kto a simple linear stem cell
network of type G1 (see Fig. 2), for example as follows:Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 11
A0 A1 A2 Ak−1 Ak=B C1
12
2k
kk
c
Fig. 7: Network NI kG1Multi-linear stem cell network starting from 2kidentical cells:
This network generates kidentical divisions to produce 2kidentical daughter stem cells of type
Ak=Bfrom one founder cell A 1. The Bstem cells are controlled by a linear stem cell sub-
network that after nrounds of division, jointly produce 2k×nterminal cells of type Cwhile
retaining a constant 2kof linear stem cells of type B. Starting from one founder cell, the total
number of cells after nrounds of synchronous division is: Cells (n;k)=2k+2k×(n−k+1)=
2k×(n−k+2)ifn>kand Cells (n;k)=2notherwise.
The below is function describing the ideal rate of growth after nsynchronous divisions where
kis the number of identical daughter cell divisions nodes in the network in Fig. 7.
Cells (n;k)=/braceleft.alt42nifn<=k
2k+2k×(n−k+1)=2k×(n−k+2)forn>k
3.2 Stem cells that generate identical cells
AL A0 A1 A2 Ak−1 Ak=B1
12
2k
kL
0
Fig. 8: Network NG1I kLinear stem cell producing 2kidentical cells each loop: This linear
stem cell network generates 2kidentical daughter cells of type Ak=Bat each stem cell loop.
TheALstem cell is controlled by a linear stem cell sub-network that after nrounds of division,
that ultimately produces n×2kterminal cells of type B. Starting from one founder cell, the total
number of cells after nrounds of synchronous division is: Cells (n;k)=2k+2k×(n−k+1)=
2k×(n−k+2)ifn>kand Cells (n;k)=2notherwise.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 12
3.3 Stem cell networks commute with identical cell networks
It turns out that in terms of ultimate cell production the network in Fig. 8 is equivalent to
the network in Fig. 7. This is because the simple network NG 1commutes with NI networks.
More generally, given NI kthen any element NG 1in NG 1commute with the elements of NI kto
generate the same ultimate cell proliferation even while the multicellular form may vary.
4 Stem cell networks and cancer stem cells
Normal networks that come closest to cancer networks are stem cell networks. What distin-
guishes normal from cancer stem cell networks is not primarily their network architecture but
rather when and where a stem cell network is linked and activated, and what further networks
the stem cell network activates. A cancer stem cell network is either formed by mutation in
the wrong place in the global developmental network, it is activated inappropriately in the
multicellular system, or it activates inappropriate, nonfunctional networks with abnormal and
possibly pathological cellular or multicellular phenotypes relative to the overall multicellular
system.
From our theory it follows that there are at least two main kinds of stem cell networks, linear
and geometric. However, linear stem cell networks are just a special case of geometric stem
cell networks, namely, 1st order geometric stem cell networks. These are also fundamental
cancer stem cell networks. A normal linear stem cell produces a cell of a particular type that
is either terminal itself or activates a terminal network. A second order geometric stem cell
network is a meta-stem cell network that produces linear stem cells. Thus, linear stem cells
produce no further stem cells. Meta stem cells do produce stem cells.
Since a linear stem cell cannot produce further stem cells there must exist meta-stem cells that
produce more than one stem cell. These in turn are produced by yet further upstream embryonic
networks. The original embryonic fertilized egg is controlled by the global embryonic network
that is mostly terminal with the exception of its stem cells. It consists of many subnetworks
that may be multiply employed.
A linear cancer stem cell produces no additional cancer cells. Interestingly, we will see that
the order of a cancer meta-stem cell network controlling a cancer cell determines the possible
metastases producible by that cancer cell (see Sec. 5).
A further possibility is that there exist normal exponential stem cell networks that are activated
by cell signaling, in e ect a communication network linked with a cytogenic control network
to produce cells quickly on demand. However, such networks are be dangerous, leading to a
proliferative explosion if something goes wrong with the communication network.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 13
4.1 Normal stem cells and cancer stem cells
Stem cells have the function of continually producing new cells in tissue that is meant to re-
generate. Stem cells have functional developmental control networks with preexisting loops.
This makes the progression to cancer a shorter route, because the linear, proliferating network
already exists. We just need to mutate in one more loop to makes it exponential and then with
additional mutations it becomes invasive. Any slow growing cancers that suddenly become
very fast growing may be an instance of this process.
If a stem cell proliferates conditionally, i.e., based on some contextual cellular or environmen-
tal condition, then a stem cell can transform into a cancer stem cell by a situation or process
that constantly activates the antecedent condition necessary for the stem cell to divide. This
can happen if the activating signal is constant or the receptor system for that signal is mutated
to be constantly on. It may be the case that a stem cell may already be potentially, linearly,
geometrically or exponentially, proliferative, but its antecedent conditions may not be satis-
ﬁed. Hence, if the conditional system remains functional the potential stem cell proliferation
whether it be linear or exponential will not show itself. However, when the antecedent con-
ditions for proliferation are fulﬁlled or the antecedent testing system is mutated to a constant
on-state then the stem cell cancer will ﬂower. An example of this would be a stem cell whose
proliferation depends on some signal such as a hormone that, together with a signal transduc-
tion pathway, activates the stem cell proliferative loop. Then if the signal is constantly turned
on or the signal transduction mechanism is in a constant "signal received" state, then the stem
cell will proliferate either linearly, geometrically or exponentially depending on the structure
of its controlling network.
A further danger with some types of stem cells is that they may already be functionally, tissue
invasive in order to move to the appropriate site, as, for example, in wound healing. This
invasive property would then make a stem cell cancer even more dangerous.
Stem cells by themselves are not cancerous, but they have the properties of conditional, pos-
sibly invasive, linear, geometric or exponential cancers. The boundary between a cancer and
normal cell may not always be clear since in the wrong context a normal stem cell may be
cancerous.
Distinguishing linear cancer cells from stem cells based purely on the network architecture is
dicult if not impossible. Stem cells generate normal cell that are functional in the context of
the organism. Any stem cell that generates such "normal" cells inappropriately is a cancer cell.
Thus, the dividing line between linear cancers and stem cells may be indistinct. Thus, a normal
stem cell network becomes cancerous if it is activated inappropriately with respect to the over-
all functioning of a biological system in the organism, or if the cell di erentiation networks
the stem network activates generate abnormal cells (e.g., invasive cells, or having abnormal
phenotype) or cells that generate structures inappropriately in the overall system.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 14
4.2 Cancer susceptibility of stem cells
We see why stem cells are especially susceptible to develop into cancer networks. First, all that
has to happen is that the ﬁrst order or second order conditional antecedents are mutated to be
always true, then the stem cell networks, once activated produces cells indeﬁnitely independent
of outside signaling. Second, any of the links from the other non-proliferative daughter cell
dierentiation site could loop back to a ﬁrst or second order loop activation point to produce
an exponential cancer.
Having two or more proliferative loops does not necessarily result in an exponential cancer.
However, they can transform into exponential cancers. For example, using the WHO-grading
scheme, astrocytoma grad I, which is slow growing and benign, appears to be a linear cancer
of type NG, astrocytoma grade II - >grade III. Grade III is relatively fast growing compared to
grade II, but can be present for several years and then suddenly change to grade IV Glioblas-
toma Multiforme (GBM). GBM are fast growing and spread quickly. .
5 Hierarchy of metastases from geometric cancer networks
One of the most important consequences of the hierarchical nature of stem cell networks is
that they imply the existence of a corresponding metastatic hierarchy. Geometric cancer stem
cell networks form a hierarchy of interlinked stem cell networks such that an k-th order stem
cell network generates a cell controlled by an k-1 order stem cell network. Thus, 3rd order or
meta-meta-stem cell networks produce cells controlled by 2nd order, meta-stem cells. A 2nd
order or meta-stem cell generates a cell controlled by a 1st order, linear stem cell network. At
the base of the hierarchy is a terminal network controlling a cell generated by a 1st order, linear
stem cell.
This hierarchy of control in higher order stem cell networks has direct consequences for the
types of metastases that can, in principle, be generated by such higher order geometric net-
works. In other words. the metastatic potential of a cancer stem cell is determined by the
order of its geometric control network. As we will see, this the dynamic phenotypic properties
of the metastases are a result of their place in the metastatic hierarchy. This can be used for
diagnosis and reverse inference as to the type of stem cell network controlling the metastatic
tumor.
Note, however, that there may also be functional uses of higher order stem cell networks for
the production and distribution of stem cells in healthy multicellular systems. Meta stem cells
and their stem cell network hierarchy could be used by organisms to generate and deliver lower
level stem cells to various parts of the body.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 15
(a)Terminal metastases from a primary
1st order geometric cancer network.
(b)1st order and terminal metastases from
a 2nd order geometric cancer network.
Fig. 9: Two views of metastasis by 1st order and 2nd order geometric networks. In Figure
9a: One primary 1st order geometric, linear cancer cell (in red) generates terminal metastatic
cells (in blue). But the blue terminal cells are terminal generating no further cells. The right
hand Figure 9b: A 2nd order geometric cancer network generates 1st order geometric and ter-
minal metastases. Against a background of identical cells (in light pink) there is one primary
2nd order geometric cancer cell (in red) that generates metastases consisting of 1st order ge-
ometric cancer cells (in green). These in turn, generate secondary metastatic passive terminal
cells (in blue). The blue terminal cells may metastasize, moving to other regions, but they do
not generate further cells.
A 2nd order geometric cancer cell generates 1st order linear cancer cells (see Fig. 3). If these
1st order linear cancer cells metastasize then we have a phenotype of multiple linear cancer
growths in di erent regions of the body. For example, one might have multiple slow growing
cysts in di erent regions of the body. In this case, these cysts are metastases that were gen-
erated from a single meta-stem cell that generates progenitor cells that generate cysts. Other
examples, might include slowly progressing cancers that move in the lymphatic system. Here
again in may, but need not, be the case that a single meta-cancer stem cell is generating sub-
cancers that have the overt phenotype of a uniform cancer progressing in some direction across
a region or through the whole body.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 16
5.1 Secondary and tertiary metastases generated by 3rd order cancer net-
works
(a)1st oder and terminal metastases
from a primary 2nd order geometric
cancer network.
(b)2nd, 1st order, and terminal metastases from a pri-
mary 3rd order geometric cancer network.
Fig. 10: Comparing metastases by 2nd order and 3rd order geometric cancer networks.
The left hand Figure 11a: A 2nd order geometric cancer network (Fig. 3) generates 1st
order geometric and terminal metastases. Against a background of identical cells (in light
pink) there is one primary 2nd order geometric cancer cell (in red) that generates metastases
consisting of 1st order geometric cancer cells (in green). These in turn, generate secondary
metastatic passive terminal cells (in blue). The blue terminal cells may metastasize, moving
to other regions, but they do not generate further cells. In the right hand Figure 11b: A
primary tumor controlled by a 3rd order geometric cancer network generates 2nd order and
1st order geometric and terminal metastases. The primary 3rd order geometric cancer network
(G3) generates 2nd order (G2) metastases. These G2 networks in turn generate 1st order (G1)
metastases. The 1st order geometric (G1) cancer cells in turn generate terminal (G0) cells that
are also potentially metastatic (invasive) but do not generate further cells.
In general, k-th order geometric cancer networks Gk(see Fig. 5) generated cells controlled
byk−1 order geometric cancer networks Gk−1. These Gk−1networks, in turn, generate cells
controlled by k−2 order cancer networks Gk−2, etc. Therefore, third-order geometric cancer
networks G3 (Fig. 4) , such as the above simulated network in Fig. 10, generate cells controlled
by second-order cancer networks G2, (Fig. 3). In turn, G2-networks generate cells controlled
by 1st-order geometric networks G1, (Fig. 2). G1-networks are linear cancer networks which
generate terminal cells G0 that do not proliferate.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 17
(a)Active cells in 1st oder metastases
from a primary 2nd order geometric can-
cer network.
(b)Active cells in 2nd and 1st order metastases generated by
a primary 3rd order geometric cancer network.
Fig. 11: View of the active proliferating cells in G1, G2 and G3 geometric metastases in
Fig. 10 . Cellular proliferation alone does not distinguish higher order from lower order geo-
metric tumors including metastatic tumors. Only terminal cells of type G0 can be distinguished
since they do not divide, or at most, are progenitor cells that ultimately lead to terminal cells
that no longer divide. Rather than cell proliferation alone, it is the control state and downstream
proliferation potential that distinguishes geometric networks from each other.
5.2 Relating metastatic phenotype with geometric cancer networks
Since any of the cells generated by a cancer network have the potential to metastasize by mov-
ing to other regions of the organism, each primary tumor controlled by a cancer network will
have a distinct metastatic phenotype. Therefore, we can use the phenotype of the metastases
to draw inferences about the nature and architecture of the network generating that phenotype.
Moreover, if we ﬁnd the metastases that together form related patterns as described for the ge-
ometric metastases above, it warrants looking for the primary tumor generating the secondary
and tertiary metastases.
5.3 Treatment options for metastases generated by geometric cancer net-
works
Treatment would focus on eliminating or transforming cells with the higher level control net-
works generating the less dangerous lower level networks. Treatment can be by cell deathEric Werner, Stem cell networks 18
or by network transformations that block or modify the cancer network. Di erent transfor-
mations are necessary for di erent cancer networks. Once metastases have been created by
a higher level network, it is no longer su cient to block or transform the higher level initi-
ating subnetwork. Instead, each of the cells with lower level cancer subnetworks also have
to be transformed or destroyed. If they are 1st order linear networks, they may be relatively
harmless since they only produce cells that no longer proliferate. However, this will depend
on their location and e ect on the other multicellular contexts in which they reside. Because
of cell interactions such as cell signaling, stochastic reactivation of higher level cancer net-
works such cells, depending on their di erentiation state and the cellular context, may still be
dangerous.
5.4 Stochastic reactivation of terminal cells in geometric networks
If terminal cells can reactivate a proliferative control state in a network, then the more numerous
the number of terminal cells the more likely it is that one or more of them will become an active
cancer cell. Hence, given the possibility of stochastic activation of ancestral cancer networks,
formerly passive metastatic cells can become active tumors.
6 Stochastic di erentiation in stem cell networks
It has been argued that the traditional theory of linear stem cells is wrong [9]. On the traditional
theory of stem cells, stem cells are immortal and constant in number. However, experimental
data appears to show that for some stem cells appear to generate further stem cells. On a
deterministic theory stem cells that produce stem cells are what we have termed meta-stem
cells. However, another model would have stem cells divide and di erentiate stochastically
either exponentially into two stem cells, linearly into a stem cell and a terminal cell, or into
two terminal cells. The evidence, suggests that epidermal cells divide stochastically according
to the distribution 8% double stem cells, 84% one stem cell and one terminal cell, and 8% two
terminal cells. The biological mechanism is not known.
6.1 Historical background: A network that generates Till’s stochastic stem cell
model
One of the ﬁrst models of stem cells was the stochastic model of hemopoietic cell proliferation
[Till et.al. [18]]. Till distinguished what he called “colony forming cells” that have the capacity
to form colonies from di erentiated cells without that capacity. When a colony develops from
a single cell only a small number of these cells have “colony-forming capacity”. The rest are
dierentiated cells without this capacity. This he considered a "birth-and-death" process, the
generation of colony cells being a birth process and the generation of di erentiation a death
process. According to the model, a given cell with colony-forming capacity can either divideEric Werner, Stem cell networks 19
into two colony forming cells (with probability p2) or di erentiate into a terminal cell (with
probability p0=1−p2) having no colony forming capacity. The case of generating mixtures of
one colony-forming cells and one di erentiated cell was considered a birth process followed
by death and was handled by adjusting the probabilities.
Production numbers of blood cells is relatively constant under normal conditions. Under stress
or increased demand there is a rapid increase in production of blood cells. The properties of
hemopoiesis (blood cell creation) implies that the production of di erentiated cells is precisely
controlled. Hence, Till argues, there must be control mechanisms. Till then considers if cell
proliferation (the numbers of cells produced) is also under precise control or lax control. He
argues for lax control and that the data suggests cell proliferation is stochastic. While a stem
cell network was not given by Till, the behavior of the Till model of colony forming cells can
be generated by following stochastic stem cell network:
S J1 Tj1
j2p2
p0=1−p2
Fig. 12: Network TillSSC: Classic stochastic stem cell network . This network models one of
the earliest stochastic stem cell theories (Till [18]). A stem cell (S) divides to produce two cell
of type J1 that then stochastically change either into a terminal network cell T or “self renew”
by dedi erentiating to the parent stem cell S type. The cell J1 stochastically either loops back
to activate the stem cell S with probability p2or it activates the terminal network cell T with
probability p0=1−p2. The network’s behavior approaches a deterministic exponential stem
cell network as the probability p2approach 1. Stem cells controlled by such a network can
spontaneously stop because of the fact that for all points in all possible paths in the network
there is the possibility of reaching the terminal cell state T. The multicellular system controlled
by this network consists of two main cell types: Stem cells (S) that can proliferate and terminal
cells (T) with no proliferative potential.
Under this network (Fig. 12) a stem cell divides into identical daughter cells J1. Each J1
cell can with probability p2dedierentiate into a stem cell S or di erentiate with probability
p0=1−p2into a terminal cell T. Hence, unlike Till’s original model, this network explicitly
handles all the possible outcomes of stem cell division. Upon stem cell division, the network
allows the generation of two stem cells (S,S), as well as the mixed case (S,T) of one stem cell
and one di erentiated cell, and the case (T,T) of two di erentiated cells.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 20
Till’s model has been criticized because it predicts that stem cells eventually di erentiate into
terminal cells and, thus, no longer self renew. However, this depends on the probability distri-
bution. If pis high then exponential proliferation outruns terminal cell di erentiation.
A central problem with this network is that the key to its behavior is dependent on the value
of the probability p2. On the one hand, if the probability p2of stem cell self-renewal is high,
it tends toward exponential growth of stem cells. This leads to too many stem cells versus
progenitor and terminal, specialized cells. On the other hand, if the self-renewal probability p2
is low, it eventually leads to the elimination of all stem cells. In the latter case, this network
does not represent a stem cell with unlimited proliferative potential. In this network, no ded-
ierentiation is possible for terminal cells. Hence, the greater the probability p0=1−p2that
the terminal network T is activated, the more likely is the permanent quiescence of the parent
stem cell.
If the probability p2=1 we have exponential growth of stem cells. If p2=0 we have di eren-
tiation to the terminal cells T. Hence, this network cannot model the developmental dynamics
of deterministic linear networks of the type ﬁg:G1 Fig. 2. However, with the right choice of
the probability distribution, it can approximate a relatively constant production of stem cells
and terminal cells.
In their Monte Carlo simulation the probability used was p2=0:6 and p0=0:4. In our Monte
Carlo simulation, using their probability distribution, the network proliferation dynamics tends
toward a 21% proportion of stem cells after 52 generations. This appears to be much higher
than the empirical data for hemopoietic stem cells. However, these percentages depend on
how many cells are generated by the terminal cell T. If T is not a terminal cell and instead a
progenitor cell controlled by a terminal network T*, and is instead a terminal cell state that
does not divide further (as was the case in Till’s original model), then the stem cell percentage
is lower being 12% after 20 generations of cell division. We add progenitor cell capacity to T
in the network in (Fig. 14) below.
Note, in this sort of modeling approach, precise di erentiation networks (architectures) are
coupled with stochastic activation networks. The topology of the network architecture sets the
boundaries for what stochastic paths are possible at all.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 21
(a) Probability p2=0.52, gives 4%
stem cells
(b) When p2=0.7 gives 36% stem
cells
(c) Probability p2=0.9 gives 80%
stem cells
Fig. 13: Three views of stem cells under di erent probabilities. All three tumors are con-
trolled by same Till network (Fig. 12 ). It shows the growth response to changes in the prob-
ability p2. As the probability p2is increased, more and more stem cells are generated due
to increasing dedi erentiation of the daughter cells to their parent stem cell. The stochastic
exponential network begins to dominate as p2approaches 1.
6.2 The Till stochastic network extended to generate progenitor cells
It is very simple to extend Tills original model of hemopoietic (blood) stem cells (S) [Till
et.al. [18]] to include progenitor networks that control the proliferative capacity of stem cell
progeny. We simply link the terminal cell state to a bounded network T* that in the case below
is simply a network that results in one further cell division to produce two distinct daughter
cells T1 and T2. But, T* could be any bounded network. Thus, in principle, given the right
network T*, such progenitor cells could develop into arbitrarily complex structures.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 22
t1
S J1 T∗ T1 T2
t2j1
j2p2
p0=1−p2
Fig. 14: Network TillSSCpro: Classic stochastic stem cell network (Fig. 12) extended to
include progenitor networks . This network extends one of the earliest stochastic stem cell
theories (Till [18]) to include progenitor cells. A stem cell (S) divides to produce two cell of
type J1 that then either divide into a terminal network cell T* or “self renew” by dedi erenti-
ating to the parent stem cell S. The cell J1 stochastically loops back to activate the stem cell
S with probability p2or it activates the terminal network cell T* with probability p0=1−p2.
In Till, T* is a terminal cell type T. In this example, T* is a terminal network for a progenitor
cell that generates two terminal cell types T1 and T2. As with the original model (Fig. 12), this
network’s behavior approaches a deterministic exponential stem cell network as the probability
p2approach 1. Stem cells controlled by such a network can spontaneously stop because of the
fact that for all points in all possible paths in the network there is the possibility of reaching
the terminal cell state T*. The multicellular system controlled by this network consists of three
main cell types: Stem cells (S), progenitor cells (T*) with limited proliferative potential, and
terminal cells (T1, T2) with no proliferative potential.
As with the previous network Fig. 12, the proliferative potential of stem cells under this net-
work Fig. 14 is dependent on the probability p2. Since no dedi erentiation is possible in this
network for terminal cells T1 and T2. Furthermore, it is not an inherent property of the net-
work topology that stem cells self renew. However, if the dedi erentiation probability p2of
self renewal is high enough then stem cells do self renew and may even dominate the colonies
they generate.
If the probability p2=1 we have exponential growth of stem cells, with no progenitor cells T*.
Ifp2=0 we have di erentiation to to the terminal progenitor network T* which in this case
ends in just two terminal cells T1 and T2. Hence, this network cannot model the developmental
dynamics of deterministic linear networks of the type G1 Fig. 2. However, with the right choice
of the probability distribution, it can approximate that a relatively constant ratio of stem cells,
progenitor and terminal cells.
It follows that under the Till model of stem cells we do not need dedi erentiation of terminal
cells to maintain stem cell capacity. All we need is for the 1st order stem cells to be physically
loose, mixing in with the terminal cells in the tumor as it grows. In this case, we would see
proliferating stem cells within the tumor in the context of what appear to be only terminal cells.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 23
It may appear as if terminal cells have spontaneously dedi erentiated into stem cells, but this
need not be the case since it may be the result of stem cell mixing.
What could also be happening is that we have a 2nd order geometric stem cell network that
is generating 1st order stem cells which due to developmental control in conjunction with
physics leads to a mixture of 1st order stem cells with terminal cells. Since the control state
of a cell my be hidden by the overt di erentiation state of the cell, the 1st order stem cells
may be indistinguishable relative to a set of markers from terminal cells. Stochastically or
under particular conditions these 1st order stem cells may then begin to proliferate generating
terminal or progenitor cells.
6.3 A ﬂexible stochastic network architecture with exponential and linear po-
tential
S J1 J2 Tj1
j2p
1−p
q1−q
Fig. 15: Network XLSSC: Flexible exponential-linear stochastic stem cell network . One
stem cell (S) divides to produce two cells (J1 and J2) that each stochastically activate either the
stem cell itself or a terminal cell.
In the network in Fig. 15 is very ﬂexible. Depending on the probability distribution, the net-
work can range between being exponential, linear, or terminal, as well as every mixture in
between. Furthermore, the network can be deterministic, stochastic or mixture of both. This
ﬂexibility is partly the result of separating out the probability distributions for the behaviors
of the two daughter cells. It shows that the architecture of the network imposes constraints on
what kinds of developmental dynamics are in principle possible. The probability distribution
presupposes a network architecture of possible developmental paths.
The cell S is only a stem cell stochastically and not intrinsically when p<1 and q<1. When
p=q=1 the network is deterministic exponential. When p=1;q=0 or p=0;q=1 the
network is deterministic linear, i.e., a deterministic 1st order geometric stem cell network. IfEric Werner, Stem cell networks 24
p=q=0 the network is terminal. When p=1 and q<1, or when q=1 and p<1, then the
network is mixed deterministic linear with stochastic exponential tendencies.
If probabilities p=qthen as pandqapproach 1 the network approaches the behavior of a
deterministic exponential network. However, if pandqare di erent then this network can
simulate a linear stochastic network as well when, for example, papproaches 1 and qap-
proaches 0, or vice versa. As the probabilities pandqdecrease, the more frequently the cancer
stem cell results in a terminal tumor that does not develop further because it consists only of
cells of terminal type T. This shows that stochastic cancer stem cell networks can in some cases
go into spontaneous remission. While this network can also exhibit exponential growth even
in a stochastically linear probability distribution, because of the two backward loops, there is
a diminishing probability that it remains exponential. Thus, whether this network results in
linear or exponential proliferation depends on the probability distribution.
For the network XLSSC, if the probabilities p=1−qthen the higher the probability of p
the more the network approximates a deterministic linear developmental network. Since, in
this case the distribution is anti-symmetric, the cell population partition of cell types consists
of an equal number of exponential stem cells and terminal cells, with the majority of cells
being linear stem cells. This corresponds to the observed distribution in epidermal basal stem
cells. If, on the other hand we have a symmetric distribution where p=qthen the higher
the probability of pthe more the network approximates a deterministic exponential network.
Thus the type of cancer network we have depends on the probability distributions over the
connecting stochastic links.
The network XLSSC (Fig. 15) has some similarity to the Till model (TillSSC Fig. 12), when
p=q(and value of probability p=p2as in the original model by Till [18] model) and T.
The Till model forces that daughter cells of S are the same. In contrast, this model is more
ﬂexible in that, depending on the probability distribution ( p,q), it can model both exponential
and linear dynamics of multicellular development.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 25
6.4 Linear stochastic stem cell network LSSC
L J1 Tj1
bp
1−p
Fig. 16: Network LSSC: A linear stochastic stem cell network . A linear stem cell (L) divides
to produce a terminal cell T and cell J1. The cell J1 stochastically loops back to activate the
stem cell T or it activates the terminal cell T. The network’s behavior approaches a deterministic
linear stem cell network as the probability papproach 1. Cancer stem cells controlled by such a
network can go into spontaneous remission because of the fact that for all points in all possible
paths in the network there is the possibility of reaching the terminal cell state T.
L J1 Tj1
t
p1−p
Fig. 17: Network DLSSC: Deterministic linear stem cell network with stochastic delay . A
linear stem cell (L) divides to produce a terminal cell T and cell J1. The cell J1 stochastically
loops back to activate the stem cell T with probability p. Unlike with a true linear stochastic
network like LSS which stochastically self-di erentiates to L with probability por dieren-
tiates to T, this is a deterministic linear stem cell network that always self-di erentiates back
to L. The stochasticity only e ects the rate at which the cell divides. The probability ponly
eects the frequency of looping back to L and, thereby, changes the cycle time cell division.
Unlike LSSC, the linear cancer stem cells controlled by this network never go into spontaneous
remission since the cell endlessly self-renews. The lower the probability pthe longer it takes
for the cell to cell renew and divide.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 26
6.5 1st-Order Geometric Cancer Networks with open stochastic dedi erentia-
tion
S J Ta
j
p1−p
Fig. 18: Network G1SD: A 1st-order geometric cancer with stochastic dedi erentiation:
In this linear network, a cell of type Sis a 1st-order stem cell. It produces progenitor cells of
type J that have a stochastic dedi erentiation potential. A cell J can either dedi erentiate to its
parent state S or di erentiate into the terminal cell T. The e ect of the stochasticity is seen in
the population of progenitor cells J produced by the network. The lower the probability pof
dedierentiation, the greater the number of terminal cells in the cell population generated by
the stem cell S.
6.6 1st-Order Geometric Cancer Networks with closed stochastic dedi erentia-
tion
In the above network Fig. 18 dedi erentiation can occur once prior to permanent di erentiation
in a terminal cell state. The e ect of the stochasticity can only be seen in the tumor as a
whole that is by the cancer stem cell. In the following network dedi erentiation is a constant
possibility for the life of the cell.
S J Ta
j
p1−p
Fig. 19: Network G1SDc: A 1st-order geometric cancer with closed stochastic dedi eren-
tiationEric Werner, Stem cell networks 27
In this linear network Fig. 19, a cell of type Sis a 1st-order stem cell. It produces progenitor
cells of type J that have a continual stochastic dedi erentiation potential. A cell J can either
dedierentiate to its parent state S or maintains its present state J. In this closed stochastic
network, a cell J continues to have a dedi erentiation potential for the life of that cell. There
is no path to permanent terminal di erentiation. This contrasts with the network Fig. 18 where
the cell only has a limited time frame to dedi erentiate prior to its permanent di erentiation
into a terminal cell T. Thus, all in a population of cells generated by S have the potential to
dedierentiate. In contrast, in the network Fig. 18 if the probability pis low, most cells in the
population generated by S will be terminal cells with no dedi erentiation potential.
6.7 Closed exponential stem cell network with stochastic delays
Depending on the probability distribution, the next stochastic network proliferative properties
can vary from deterministic terminal, linear, or exponential to stochastic terminal, linear or
exponential.
S J1 J2 Tj1
j2p
1−p
q1−q
Fig. 20: Network DXSSC modiﬁed LSSC: Closed exponential stochastic stem cell net-
work . If the probability q>0 then this network is inherently nonterminal. All stochastic paths
lead to potentially nonterminal nodes in the network. p=q=0 is terminal. p=q=1 is
exponential. p=1;q=0 is linear. p=0;q=1 is exponential.
Unlike LSSC Fig. 16, if the probability q>0 in cell state J2 then there are no true, probability
independent, terminal cells in DXSSC Fig. 20. True terminal cells have no possible stochas-
tically available paths that lead to a reversal of di erentiation to a more dedi erentiated cell
type. Instead, all cell states are stochastic with possible developmental paths that lead to the
original founder stem cell S. The cell in state J2 has a probability qof dedi erentiating to S.
The higher the probabilities qandpthe more this network mirrors the behavior of a determin-
istic exponential network. If either porqis low while the other high it is more similar to a
linear developmental network. Thus the probability distribution determines the similarity toEric Werner, Stem cell networks 28
linear or exponential networks. Even if the probability of qis very low, as the number of J2
cell increase it becomes more and more likely that one of them will dedi erentiate to S. Thus,
the cancer pulls away from linearity with an increasing cell population size.
If probabilities q=p=0 then the network is deterministic terminal network leading to only one
cell division. If q=0 and p=1 we have a deterministic linear stem cell network. However, if
the probability q=0 and p>0, then the network is a stochastic linear network where the lower
the probability pthe greater the chance that proliferation terminates. If either p=1 or p=0,
and if q=1 then the network is a deterministic exponential stem cell network. If q>0 then no
matter how small the nonzero probability qis, proliferation increases with time as more and
more cells are created.
Remark: There is another way to escape the maze of exponential proliferation. Cell prolif-
eration can be inﬂuenced by the number of times the self-loop at J2 is allowed to repeat. If it
is it is only allowed to repeat only a limited number of times relative then become quiescent,
then, depending on the probability q, it could result in a terminal di erentiation state after some
stochastic tries. In other words, if, in parallel with the repetitions of the self-entry loop at J2,
there exists a separate simultaneous, parallel process of terminal di erentiation by means of
some counting mechanism (where the cell at J2 becomes quiescent after some ﬁnite number of
counting steps), then this network could lead to the ultimate termination of cell proliferation
or at most linear proliferation. The counting mechanism could be dependent on the number of
loops executed at J2 or it could be a function of some other temporal variable.
6.8 A 1st order geometric /exponential stochastic stem cell network with stochas-
tic progenitor cell dedi erentiation
G J1 J2 B J3 J4 T∗p
1−p
q
1−qs1−s
1−rrj1
j2j3
j4
Fig. 21: Network G1SSC: A 1st-order stochastic geometric /exponential stem cell network
with stochastic dedi erentiation .Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 29
This stochastic stem cell network (Fig. 21) generates progenitor cells B that generate cells J2
that can dedi erentiate to stem cells G or di erentiate to a terminal network T∗. Depending on
the probability distribution, this network can exhibit terminal, linear-geometric, and exponen-
tial developmental dynamics. If the probability distribution is such that p=q=r=s=1 then
this is equivalent to a deterministic 1st order geometric stem cell network. A 1st-order stem
cell (G) stochastically divides to produce either two progenitor cell B, or or two stem cells G or
one progenitor cell B and one stem cell G. and cell J1. The cells in states J1 or J2 stochastically
loop back to activate the stem cell G or to activate the progenitor cell B. The progenitor cell
Bdivides into a semi-terminal cell T∗by way of J3 or in divides into two cells of type J4. J4
either terminates with T∗or it dedi erentiates into a stem cell G.
Its behavior approaches a deterministic 1st-order geometric stem cell network as the proba-
bilities pandqapproach 1. However, the subnetwork activated by this 1st-order geometric
network can still stochastically dedi erentiate into one or two new stem cells G. Cancers con-
trolled by such a network can go into spontaneous remission because of the fact that for all
points in all possible paths in the network there is the possibility of reaching a terminal cell
state. However, because there is the possibility at J1, J2 and J4 to dedi erentiate to earlier,
upstream stem cell states, the relative numbers of stem cells to terminal cells will be higher
than in networks that have fewer dedi erentiation pathways. Note, too that the dedi erentia-
tion pathways introduce several possibilities for exponential growth. Even if dedi erentiation
probabilities are very small, any increase in these probabilities could have a signiﬁcant desta-
bilizing inﬂuence on the resulting tumor.
6.9 A broad spectrum Linear or 2nd order geometric or exponential stochastic
stem cell network
G J1 J2 B J3 J4 Tp
1−p
q
1−qs
1−s
1−rrj1
j2j3
j4
Fig. 22: Network LG2XSSC: A stochastic linear, 2nd order geometric or exponential stem
cell network . If the probability distribution is such that p=q=r=s=1 then this is equivalent
to a deterministic 2nd order geometric stem cell network. Thus, as these probabilities approach
1 the behavior approaches a 2nd order geometric stem cell network.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 30
In Fig. 22, a 2nd-order meta-stem cell (G) divides to produce a 1st-order stem cell Band cell
J1. The cell J1 stochastically loops back to activate the meta-stem cell G or it activates the ﬁrst
order linear stem cell B. The 1st-order stem cell Bdivides into a semi-terminal cell C and a cell
J2. The cell J2 stochastically activates either its parent stem cell B, the semi-terminal cell C or
dedierentiates to G. The cell C also can stochastically dedi erentiate to any of the previous
stem cell fates (G, B) or di erentiate into the ﬁnal terminal cell T.
The network consists of two linked 1st-order linear stochastic networks. Its behavior ap-
proaches a deterministic 2nd-order geometric stem cell network as the probabilities pandq1
approach 1. Cancers controlled by such a network can go into spontaneous remission because
of the fact that for all points in all possible paths in the network there is the possibility of
reaching a terminal cell state.
However, because there is the possibility at J2 and C to dedi erentiate to earlier, upstream net-
work states, the relative numbers of stem cells to terminal cells will be higher than in networks
that have fewer dedi erentiation pathways. Note, too that the dedi erentiation pathways in-
troduce several possibilities for exponential growth. Even if their probabilities ( q3,r2,r3) are
very small, any increase in these probabilities could have a signiﬁcant destabilizing inﬂuence
on the resulting tumor.
The deterministic possible behaviors include: (p=0;q=1;s=0;r=1)is terminal. (p=
1;q=0)is exponential. (p=1;q=1;s=0;r=1)is linear. (p=1;q=1;s=1;r=1)is
2nd order geometric. (p=1;q=1;s=1;r=0)is a linear network linked to an exponential
network.
6.10 A Master stochastic geometric and exponential network
We now present a generalized, broad spectrum, master network where each probability distri-
bution results in a particular geometric or exponential network. One way to make the develop-
mental network control theory more acceptable to traditional mathematicians and physicists is
to formulate the networks in terms of di erential equations. Given that stochastic networks in
the cancer paper can be made so general as to describe any network based on the probability
distribution, perhaps one can use stochasticity in di erential equations to attain one Master
Equation that describes all the major types of networks. Particular probability distributions
would then give particular network behavior. The Master Network and Master Equation can
be made fully general by allowing arbitrarily many loops.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 31
N1 J1 J2 N2 J3 J4 N3 Ni Nkp1
1−p1
q11−q1p2
1−p2
1−q2q2j1
j2j3
j4
Fig. 23: Network MasterNet: A stochastic linear, k-th order geometric or exponential
stem cell network . Each subnetwork Nifori=1:::khas the same form as N1. If the prob-
ability distribution is such that pi=qi=1 for i=1:::i=kfor each network Nithen this is
equivalent to a deterministic k-th order geometric stem cell network N1:::Ni:::Nk. Thus, as
the probabilities pi=qiapproach 1 the behavior approaches a k-th order geometric stem cell
network. On the other hand, if any reachable network Nihas probabilities pi=1−qi=1 the
network has exponential potential. Note, we assume Nklinks to a terminal network Nk+1=T.
6.11 2nd Order Geometric stochastic stem cell network
G J1 B J2 Cj1
bj2
cp
1−pq
1−q
Fig. 24: Network G2SSC: A 2nd order geometric stochastic stem cell network . A 2nd-
order meta-stem cell (G) divides to produce a 1st-order stem cell Band cell J1.
In Fig. 24 The cell J1 stochastically loops back to activate the meta-stem cell G or it activates
the ﬁrst order linear stem cell B. The 1st-order stem cell Bdivides into a terminal cell C and
a cell J2. The cell J2 stochastically activates either the stem cell Bor the terminal cell C. The
network consists of two linked 1st-order linear stochastic networks. Its behavior approaches
a deterministic 2nd-order geometric stem cell network as the probabilities pandqapproach
1. Cancers controlled by such a network can go into spontaneous remission because of theEric Werner, Stem cell networks 32
fact that for all points in all possible paths in the network there is the possibility of reaching a
terminal cell state.
6.12 Geometric stochastic stem cell network with dedi erentiation
G J1 B J2 C Tj1
bj2
cp
1−pq1
q2
q3r1
r2
r3
Fig. 25: Network GSSCdedi : A geometric stochastic stem cell network with dedi eren-
tiation .
In Fig. 25 let probabilities q1+q2+q3=1 and r1+r2+r3=1. A 2nd-order meta-stem cell
(G) divides to produce a 1st-order stem cell Band cell J1. The cell J1 stochastically loops back
to activate the meta-stem cell G or it activates the ﬁrst order linear stem cell B. The 1st-order
stem cell Bdivides into a semi-terminal cell C and a cell J2. The cell J2 stochastically activates
either its parent stem cell B, the semi-terminal cell C or dedi erentiates to G. The cell C also
can stochastically dedi erentiate to any of the previous stem cell fates (G, B) or di erentiate
into the ﬁnal terminal cell T. The network consists of two linked 1st-order linear stochastic
networks. Its behavior approaches a deterministic 2nd-order geometric stem cell network as
the probabilities pandq1approach 1. Cancers controlled by such a network can go into spon-
taneous remission because of the fact that for all points in all possible paths in the network
there is the possibility of reaching a terminal cell state. However, because there is the possi-
bility at J2 and C to dedi erentiate to earlier, upstream network states, the relative numbers of
stem cells to terminal cells will be higher than in networks that have fewer dedi erentiation
pathways. Note, too that the dedi erentiation pathways introduce several possibilities for ex-
ponential growth. Even if their probabilities ( q3,r2,r3) are very small, any increase in these
probabilities could have a signiﬁcant destabilizing inﬂuence on the resulting tumor.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 33
6.13 Modeling deterministic stem cell networks with stochastic networks
For stochastic stem cell networks the probability distribution over a network topology deter-
mines their dynamic properties. If the stochastic network allows all possible paths in a set of
linear, 2nd-order geometric and exponential networks, then the dynamic behavior of each is
approximated as the corresponding embedded links are assigned probabilities that match exis-
tence or nonexistence of links in the particular network type, For example, if a link exists in a
network embedded in the stochastic network, then it assigned a probability close to 1 or 1 itself
if we want an exact match. If the link does not exist in the embedded network, it is assigned a
probability close to 0 or 0 itself for an exact match. Hence, the probability distribution distin-
guishes di erent network types that are embeddable in the topology or architecture of a given
stochastic network.
6.14 Transformations of probability distributions change stochastic stem cell
behavior
If we allow the probability distribution over a stochastic network to change with time because
of external factors (such as ultra violet radiation) then the same stochastic stem cell network
may exhibit various proliferative phenotypes, appearing alternatively as being in remission,
linear, geometric or exponential. Thus, meta-probability functions are at work here that condi-
tionally change the probability distribution.
7 Communication in stem cell networks
We distinguish one-way, reactive communication protocols in stem cell networks and two-way,
interactive communication protocols in stem cell networks. Reactive communication stem cell
networks only react to external signals but do not send signals themselves. Interactive commu-
nicating stem cell networks interact with the networks of other cells via signaling protocols by
both sending signals and receiving signals to and from other cells.
7.1 Reactive communication stem cell networks
This class of stem cell networks reacts to external and internal cell signals and, thereby, acti-
vating the stem cell network if the cell receives the appropriate signal. Unlike more complex
cases where there are intercellular signaling protocols involved, here the communication and
the reaction are one-sided. A cell sends a signal to which the stem cell reacts by activating its
stem cell network.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 34
7.2 A reactive signal based geometric network architecture with 1st and 2nd
order geometric potential
S M L T1
2s
ll
t
Fig. 26: Network SigLSC: Reactive signal based geometric stem cell network with linear
and meta-stem cell potential . On signal1one stem cell (M) divides to produce two cells (M
and L). M dedi erentiates back to the parent cell S. On signal 2, the linear stem cell network
L is activated. Once L is activated it will continue to produce terminal cells T. Hence, this
network is signal controlled. It will continue to produce M and hence S cells as long as it
receives the signal 1. S cells will di erentiate to L cells on signal 2stopping meta-stem cell
production. The signal 2can thus eliminate all meta-stem cells. Hence, it may be undesirable
for systems that need to preserve their meta-stem cell line. Eliminating the signal 2-path from
S to L would insure that the supply of meta-stem cells can always be increased as long as there
are some meta-stem cells or S cells. The terminal cell type T may be a single terminal cell or
a terminal progenitor cell T* that generates a bounded number of further terminal cell types.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 35
7.3 A pure reactive signal based geometric network architecture with 1st and
2nd order geometric potential
SM M SL L T1
23
4sM
sLsL
t
Fig. 27: Network SigG2SC: Pure reactive signal based geometric stem cell network with
ﬂexible geometric, linear and terminal potential . On signal1, the signal dependent cell SM
dierentiates to the meta-stem cell (M) which then divides to produce two cells ( SMandSL).
Both SMandSLare controlled by equivalent signal dependent networks. Their further behavior
depends on the signals they receive. The signal combination <1;3>produces a meta-stem
cell network with 2nd order geometric potential. The signal combination <1;4>and
<2;3>produce a 1st order stem cell network with linear potential. The signal combination
<2;3>causes terminal di erentiation stopping all cell production. This example network
shows that di erent signal combinations can change the architecture of signal based networks
leading to distinct stem cell types with di erent generative potential. The terminal cell type T
may be a single terminal cell or a terminal progenitor cell T* that generates a bounded number
of further terminal cell types.
8 Stem cell networks with interactive communication
A type of conditional cancer are social cancers that depend on cell signaling to be active. This
variety of cancer occurs when the genomic network interacts with receptors, signals and signal
transduction pathways. In that case we can have what might be called social cancers. For
example, a cell Awill signal to cell Band di erentiates to A1, Bon receiving the signal
divides into B1 and B1. B1 sends a signal back to Aand then B1 dedi erentiates to B
(its network loops back). When A1 receives its network loops back into state A. Now the
process repeats with the Acells sending signals toBcells. One can see that this process
is potentially exponential as long as we have su cient cells of type Awith su cient signal
capacity to continue to activate all the developing Bcells.
With conditional cancers that depend on social communication, the growth rate of the cancer
will depend on the accessibility of the signal. If the receiver of the signal requires direct contact
with the sender then even if the cytogenic cell contains a conditional exponential network,
since the signal may not be received by those daughter cells the exponential potential may notEric Werner, Stem cell networks 36
be realized. Furthermore, if it is a linear network then if the passive daughter cell is interposed
between the sender and the receiving cytogenic cell then growth will stop after several divisions
when the signal no loner can reach the cytogenic cells. If later, because of physical pressure or
other conditions, the cytogenic cell is again in close enough proximity to the sender then the
cancer can start again.
8.1 Interactive signaling mono generative networks
In the ﬁgure below we emphasize the communication links. The network has one cell only sig-
naling and the other cell signaling and conditionally dividing, however it leaves open whether
the cytogenic subnetwork is linear or exponential. The more detailed communication networks
and their properties will described in the sections below.

AB
Fig. 28: A social signaling cancer loop where cell Ais cancerous The cancer is social and
conditional in that it depends on a signal from Bto divide. Since the network shows only one
loop, it leaves open the potential of the other daughter cell. Hence, it leaves open whether the
cytogenic network has linear or exponential or some other potential.
Anin vivo instance of this network type is seen in bone cancer where a signal from the adjacent
tissue is required for the other to become cancerous, for example, see (Logothetis [10]).
8.2 Interactive signaling mono-linear network architecture
The following network controls two cells types A and B that communicate by cell signaling.
The cell A divides only when it receives the signal from cell B. The cell B only sends its
signal after it has received the signal from cell A.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 37
A A1 A2 T B B1
at
2b
Fig. 29: Network SigL1: An interactive signal based stem cell network with linear poten-
tial. Cell A only divides if it receives a signal from cell B. Cell B only sends a signal if it
receives a signal from cell A. On signal the cell A enters control state A 1. Then A 1sends a
signalto B. Subsequently A 1switches to control state A 2whereupon it divides to produce
two cells (the dedi erentiated parent cell type A and a terminal cell T). Hence, one of the
daughter cells of A 2dedierentiates back to the parent cell A. The cell type B does not divide
in response to the signal from A. Instead, B responds to the signal by switching to state B 1
and sending a signal to A. After that B 1dedierentiates back to B. The cell A will continue
to divide as long the signal loop is maintained. Notation : The blue and green squiggly arrows
between two cell states indicate cell signaling. The blue arrow A1/uni219DBlabeled with the trian-
gularmeans that a cell in state A1sends a signal that is received by a cell in state B. The
green arrow B/uni219DB1labeled with the rectangular means that a cell in state Bon receiving the
signaldierentiates or jumps to state B1.
8.3 Dual cancer signaling networks
A the interacting between two cooperative cell types, called partners, is driven by a network
where each partner has a separate role driven by a di erent subnetwork with signaling driving
their actions. In the ﬁgure below we emphasize the communication links. The network has
both cells signaling and conditionally dividing, however it leaves open whether the network
is linear or exponential. The more detailed communication networks and their properties will
described in the following sections.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 38

AB
Fig. 30: A dual cancer signaling network where both communicating partner cells A and B
are cancerous. The cancer is social and conditional in that each cell depends on a signal from
the other to divide. The rate and extent of growth depends on whether the properties of the
cancer subnetworks of the cell types A and B.
What we have here is a signal loop that is essential for the whole cancer network. The dual
cancer signaling network in Fig. 30 consists of two subnetworks, and A-subnetwork for cell
type A and a B-subnetwork for cell type B. Once activated, the A-subnetwork (e.g., Fig. 31)
causes a signal to be sent to cell Bfollowed by activation of subnetwork A 2whereupon the
cell divides into two daughter cells at least one of which enters the signal receptor state A
which enables the cell to receive signals of type . The signaling partner subnetwork of cell
type B is activated by a signal transduction cascade initiated by the receipt of signal . The
B-subnetwork in state B 1directs the sending of a signal to cell A. After sending the signal,
the B-subnetwork enters state B2that directs Bto divide into two daughter cells, one or both
of which loop back, to enter the receptor state B.
Clinically, we would observe depends on nature of the cytogenic subnetworks, as well as the
developing morphology of the tumor in the tissue. The cells A and B only proliferate if have
a neighbor that is a signaling partner. Thus, the growth of B cells depends on being adjacent
to A cells and vice versa. We would observe the stopping of cell proliferation if either the A
or the B cells are removed or some other agent interferes with the signaling loop. The latter
can be e ected either by inhibiting the receptor for or, the signal or, or by interfering
with either the orsignal transduction pathway. Alternatively, one could interfere with the
genome by inhibiting the areas responsible for initiation of signaling or the inhibiting the areas
responsible for cellular division. One can see there are many potential areas where one can
break the cancer loop. In actual in vivo systems one would choose that with minimal risk of
side e ects.
We now investigate some of the particular types of dual cancer signaling networks.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 39
8.4 A interactive signaling dual linear network architecture
A A1 A2 T1 B B1 B2 T2
at1 t2
b2 2
Fig. 31: Network SigL2: A signal based dual linear network with linear potential. Two
cells A and B have equivalent signaling protocols and behavior. Cell A only divides if it
receives a signal . Upon receiving the signal , cell A changes to control state A 1. Prior to
dividing A 1sends a signal to B. Then A 1changes to control state A 2whereupon it divides
to produce two cells (the dedi erentiated parent cell type A and a terminal cell type T 1). The
communication protocol for B is similar to A. Cell B only divides if it receives a signal . Upon
receiving the signal cell B di erentiates to control state B 1which then sends a signal to A.
After that, cell B 1switches to control state B 2. Then cell B 2divides to produce two di erent
cell types (the dedi erentiated parent cell type B and the terminal cell type T 2). The cell types
A and B will continue to divide as long the signal loop interaction protocol is sustained.
9 Hybrid communicative and stochastic stem cell networks
It is possible in principle for a stem cell network to become stochastic as a result of communi-
cation. In other words, it is conditionally stochastic in response to cell signaling.
So too a stochastic process can lead to cell signaling which can lead to the, possibly stochastic,
activation of another developmental network.
10 Discussion: Stem cell concepts
10.1 Formal and informal deﬁnitions of transpotency
This section can be skipped or read later since the graphical formalism with which we will
represent stem cell networks may be more intuitive.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 40
Given a cell type A, let 1::: kbe the minimal number of external operations irequired to
transform a cell type A into a cell type B. Then B=1::: kA. Then we say that cell type A
isk-distant from cell type B and B is a k-transform of A. Note, if B is a k-transform of A that
does not necessarily imply that A is a k-transform of B since the operations may be irreversible.
B is a k-transform of A if there exist a number of operations 1::: ksuch that B=1::: kA.
B is a transform of A if there exists some koperators such that B is a k-transform of A. The
transpotency of a cell type A is then deﬁnable as the set of all ordered pairs <Bi;ki>where Biis
aki-transform of A. The operational distance from A to B is number of operators i;i=1:::k
required to transform A to some type B.
Another aspect of transpotency has to do with stochasticity. It can take many attempts to
transform a cell type A into B. The operator sequence has to be applied to many cells of type
A before one of them changes into type B. Thus, the sequence of operators 1::: kapplied to
A only results in B with some probability p. Thus the transformative distance of A from B
is not just a one dimensional function of the operational distance, but also should include the
probability that an application of the operators to A will result in B. The lower the transform
probability pthe farther A is to B in transformational space. And, if the probability p=0
then B is inaccessible from A. If the probability p=1 then there is a deterministic relationship
that insures 1::: kA→B, where→means “yields” or “transforms into”. If 0 ≤p≤1
then1::: kAp→B, wherep→means “The operations 1::: kon A transform A into B with
probability p ”.
10.2 Problems with deﬁnitions of transpotency
Clearly as experimental procedures evolve the operations required to transform A into B will
change and the operational distance kmay decrease. Still this formalization makes it clear that
the larger operational distance the more resistant A is to becoming B. It is also evident that
artiﬁcial transpotency need not be correlated with natural transpotency.
Moreover, the existence of operations via transcription factors that can dedi erentiate a cell to
a transpotent totipotent or pluripotent cell and then induce that cell to di erentiate become a
speciﬁc cell type break down the di erence between transpotent cells and normal cells making
the deﬁnition of transpotent stem cell all inclusive and, thereby, useless.
In normal development, the natural transpotency of a cell depends on the natural conditions
and multicellular context of in which the cell ﬁnds itself, e.g., cell signaling in a multicellular
context. Artiﬁcial transpotency is experimentally induced transpotency resulting from viral,
chemical or physical extraneous, experimental impingements.
The degree of transpotency of a cell is not precisely deﬁned because it is ultimately an opera-
tional deﬁnition that depends on what operations are performed on cells to make them di eren-
tiate into other cells. And since a few transcription factors can make some cells dedi erentiate
into stem cells the class of artiﬁcial transpotent cells has no clear boundaries. Hence, if su -
ciently powerful experimental operations are allowed that can change any cell di erentiationEric Werner, Stem cell networks 41
state to almost any other state, then this calls into question the whole concept of artiﬁcial
transpotent, non self-renewing stem cells, since their transpotency can no longer operationally
distinguished from normal cells . The only distinguishing feature would be the number and
type of operators that are required to convert one cell type into another. The greater the number
of steps and the more di cult the operations are the more resistant a cell is to transforma-
tion.
10.3 Conceptual ambiguities
There is a conceptual ambiguity as to what stem cells are1. One the one hand stem cells are
viewed as having the capacity of endless self-renewal, and, other the other hand, stem cells are
viewed as having the capacity to di erentiate into multiple cell types. These two views of stem
cells are distinct and refer to independent properties of cells. They are di erent conceptions of
what stem cells are and what they can do. The di erence is in the capacity of a cell to generate
multiple progeny while maintaining its original, unchanged cell type, versus the capacity of a
cell to change its di erentiation state by transforming into di erent possible cell types.
The two attributes of self-renewal and transformative potential can coexist in the same cell.
However, if a stem cell has both capacities and di erentiates into some other cell type it may
loose its capacity to self-renew.
Let us call stem cells that can endlessly generate other cells while maintaining their own cell
type, iteropotent stem cells . While stem cells that have the capacity to di erentiate or transform
into various cell types transpotent stem cells .
Yet, a third conception of stem cells combines the self-renewal with a transformative capacity
by distributing the capacities over parent and daughter cells. It restricts the capacity of self-
renewal to the parent cell and the transformative potential to daughter cells. In this version,
stem cells have the capacity of endless self-renewal while they generate daughter cells that
may, but need not, have the capacity to di erentiate into multiple cell types.
In summary, stem cells may be purely iteropotent having the capacity of self-renewal but not
have transformative potency (totipotent, pluripotent, multipotent or oligopotent), or they may
be both self-renewing and have transformative potency but they may loose their self-renewing
capacity once they di erentiate, or they may be strictly self-renewing but their daughter cells
may have transformative potency. A cell with transformative potency may generate a stem cell.
A stem cell may generate another stem cell. As we will see, all these conceptions of stem cells
are realizable by di erent developmental stem cell networks.
1I am not referring to the controversy as to whether stem cells are deterministic or have a stochastic dedi eren-
tiation potential (Dick [3]).Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 42
10.4 Iteropotent versus transpotent stem cells
For example, a transpotent stem cell such as a totipotent or pluripotent stem cell may di er-
entiate into a skin cell or heart cell or neuron. Or it may transform into a progenitor cell that
generates a limited number of new cells of various types. If, however, the stem cell is an
iteropotent stem cell then it may, given the right conditions, continually generate skin cells,
or heart cells or neurons. While the same stem cell may be both a transpotent as well as an
iteropotent stem cell, it need not be. Some stem cells may be transpotent but not iteropotent
while others may be iteropotent but not transpotent. Some stem cells may generate transpotent
stem cells that are not iteropotent. And, as we will see iteropotent stem cells can generate other
stem cells. In the latter case, we will call them meta-stem cells .
It can be even more intertwined. A daughter cell of a stem cell may stochastically or in response
to an external signal, dedi erentiate into its parent stem cell control state. Dierentiation in-
cludes a change in the cell’s control state. Dedierentiation means that the cell control state
jumps from its given control state to an earlier upstream control state in its global develop-
mental network. The locality of the stem cell network in the global network determines the
particular phenotypic properties of the stem cell and that stem cell’s progeny.
Thus as we change the theoretical framework from a gene-centered view of development to
a control network view of development a new conceptual framework becomes available that
allows more precise deﬁnitions of stem cells and their properties.
The more immature a daughter cell is, the more cell types it can di erentiate into. The cell type
it becomes may depend on the cell types of the cellular context into which it is born. The more
mature the parent stem cell is the more constrained is the cell type of its daughters2.
The transpotent stem cells can be totipotent cells, pluripotent, multipotent or oligopotent. A
totipotent cell can generate an entire organism. However, it is not necessarily an iteropotent
stem cell since it does not self-renew, only one embryo is formed from a given cell under nor-
mal development. Stem cell that produced totipotent cells is a theoretical possibility. Then
each daughter cell of such a stem cell could produce an embryo. A pluripotent cell can di er-
entiate into multiple cell types. Multipotent cells are even more restricted in the cell types they
can di erentiate into. These gradations are vague and di cult to deﬁne precisely but they are
all based on the cell’s capacity to di erentiate into a set of cell types that then may or may not
be able to generate entire organisms, organs, multicellular tissue or terminate in one or more
cells of some type. If we look at the control network guiding such cells then a totipotent cell
is controlled by the global developmental control network or cenome of the organism. Trans-
formative pluripotent cells are controlled by some subnetwork of the global network. Such
transpotent networks need not have the architecture of iteropotent stem cells. Generative stem
cells are deﬁned by their developmental control network architecture or topology. It is this
architecture that is the basis of their capacity to self-renew.
2We need to distinguish stem cell network hierarchy from the stem cell maturity which has to do with network
locality.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 43
This hierarchy is based on a hierarchical network architecture. This architecture is also the
basis of metastatic hierarchies in cancer. A group of totipotent stem cells interact with each
other to prevent multiple embryos from forming, one potential embryo from each totipotent
cell.
The molecular implementation of stem cell networks involves transcription factors and possibly
as yet undiscovered RNA based regulators. The basis of all regulation is an addressing system
that maps addresses to potential control areas of the genome and the cell.
10.5 Dedi erentiation of daughter cells into stem cells
Dedierentiation potential in the daughter cell introduces yet another layer of complexity. A
stem cell may produce a daughter cell that has the capacity to dedi erentiate into its parent
stem cell state. The dedi erentiation may be stochastic based on some probability or it may
be induced by cell signaling or other cellular contextual information. In that case the origi-
nal stem cell is conditionally a meta-stem cell since it has parented a stem cell but it is also
conditionally exponential since it has generated two cells of its own cell type. However, even
exponential networks that are communication dependent need not proliferate exponentially
(Werner [27]).
10.6 Stem cell locality
The global developmental control network3is the control network responsible for the embryo-
genesis and development of multicellular organisms. Stem cells can be of various types that
depend on the position that their own local control network has in the global developmental
network. The ability of daughter cells of stem cells to assume various cell types depends on
the developmental context in which they ﬁnd themselves. The earlier the stem cell network is
linked into and activated by the global developmental network the more likely that the stem
cell daughter cells are immature and pluripotent, pluripotent meaning that they can di erenti-
ate into multiple cell types. If the stem cell network is linked later into a developmental path
within the global control network then the more likely the stem cell will produce daughter cells
that are less pluripotent, being relatively ﬁxed in their phenotype.
10.7 Distinct stem cell concepts
Stem cell properties are the result of the properties of the developmental cell network that
controls their behavior. Thus, the attributes of stem cells are directly linked to the properties of
their controlling developmental network. Hence, using network properties we can distinguish
dierent attributes of stem cells:
3The global developmental network is called the cenome in (Werner [26, 27]).Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 44
Developmental networks by deﬁnition are proliferative, meaning that they lead to one or more
cell divisions. A network has potentially inﬁnite proliferative capacity if it contains loops that
lead to endless repetition of a developmental network.
1.Stem cell potency is the capacity of a cell to di erentiate into various cell types such
as being totipotent, pluripotent and oligopotent. This capacity is the result of an under-
lying developmental subnetwork. This developmental subnetwork may or may not be
proliferative, but need not have self-renewing loops.
2.Stem cell self-generating capacity is determined by the stem cell network architecture
which includes the hierarchical order of the self-renewing stem cell network, e.g. 1st-
order, 2nd-order, kth-order geometric network.
3.Stem cell proliferative potential is the capacity of a cell to generate a set of cells when
the network it links to is run.4 5
4.Downstream potential of a net state Downstream accessible nodes of a given net state.
A net state is a set of net nodes. The execution of a net state partitions the developmental
space into a set of subspaces of multicellular systems. Each subspace is the result of
dierent developmental paths due to various possible conditions.
5.The execution potential is the set of network paths that are accessible from a given cell
network control state. The downstream network from a cell state is the subnetwork that
is accessible from that cell state. It includes every accessible cell history from the given
cell state.
A cell history is a path in the developmental network. Given a cell state let
()=
∗={H∈
/divides.alt0∃t∈	∧n∈;such that Ht=n}6
6.Stem cell locality describes the position, by way of the linkage relationships, of the local
stem cell network within the global developmental network of the organism. Stem cell
locality may inﬂuence stem cell di erentiation potency.
Note, that these distinct stem cell attributes are described in terms of the properties of the
4The ambiguity: A cell may divide into two daughter cells. These in turn can divide further. So we need to
distinguish the whole downstream potential of a cell from its immediate daughter generating potential. e.g., a stem
cell because it is self-renewing has inﬁnite potential over time. The problem is giving labels to di erent properties
of developmental networks and their dynamic behavior in a developing system of cells.
5Distinguish network accessibility from the resulting execution of that accessible downstream network. Note,
in the case of a ﬁrst order stem cell that network can be very small, and yet has potentially inﬁnite genera-
tive/proliferative potential. Because of the inﬁnite loop, the downstream proliferative potential is of a 1st order
stem cell is inﬁnite.
6TheHin
can be inﬁnite. The problem is that a state is a set of nodes which may be in di erent parts of the
network. Hence, the nodes need not be on the same history or path. While the cell state history is linear, the control
state is nonlinear since it can be on several paths simultaneously. Hence, the history of a “path” of a cell control
state is a set of histories or linear paths. It can branch out or shrink in the future. So at any point it is a set of nodes,
and over time it is a set of paths in the network. It is like parallel programs. There can be interpretation conﬂicts.
Any control pointer can change as a result of cell signaling or a new one can be added. But the receptor and its
interpretation has to be thrown ﬁrst, unless it is part of the innate non-genomic or pre-genomic or epigenomic IES.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 45
underlying stem cell network. Through these network properties we can distinguish the overt
dynamic stem cell phenotype: Stem cell potency to dierentiate into various cells types (totipo-
tent, pluripotent, oligopotent) versus stem cell proliferative capacity (the order of the meta-stem
cell network) versus stem cell network locality (where the stem cell network is linked into the
global developmental network).
A so-called stem cell that has the capacity to di erentiate into a subset of cell types may not
even have stem cell proliferative capacity. For example, a totipotent embryonic stem cell need
not be self-renewing even though it can generate stem cells that are self-renewing. Hence,
the term stem cell is being used equivocally for di erent network properties. Di erentiation
potency is an independent dimension from stem cell proliferative capacity as governed by a
stem cell network. To clearly deﬁne stem cells we need to deﬁne them through their underlying
developmental networks.
10.8 Stem cell classiﬁcation and methods that induce cell di erentiation
Furthermore, when an experimentalist manipulates a cell by various chemical or physical
means to di erentiate into some speciﬁc cell type, it does not mean that that cell has a nat-
ural potential to di erentiate into that cell type. The natural di erentiation potential is given
by the cells local active developmental network. External experimental manipulations may
force an artiﬁcial di erentiation potential by forcing the activation of totally di erent develop-
mental control network that then may give the cell a new proliferative dynamic and capacity to
dierentiate to a new, uncharacteristic phenotype.
While forced cell di erentiation may have bioengineering and medical applications, it should
not be used to deﬁne the capacity of the unforced, natural stem cell. That being said, placing the
cell in a new multicellular context or the external introduction of cell signals such as hormones,
while maintaining the cell’s integrity, can help decipher the conditional network activation
potential of the cell. Hence, the boundary between forced and unforced cell di erentiation
may be di cult to delineate.
References
[1] M. Bizzarri, A. Cucina, F. Conti, and
F. D’Anselmi. Beyond the oncogene paradigm:
Understanding complexity in cancerogene-
sis. Acta Biotheoretica , 56:173–196, 2008.
10.1007 /s10441-008-9047-8.
[2] J. Dick, R. H. Begent, and T. Meyer. Sarcoidosis
and testicular cancer: A case series and literature
review. Urologic oncology , 28(4):350–4, 2010.
[3] J. E. Dick. Stem cell concepts renew cancer re-
search. Blood , 112(13):4793–807, 2008.
[4] J. E. Dick. Looking ahead in cancer stem cell re-
search. Nature biotechnology , 27(1):44–6, 2009.[5] R. L. Gardner. Polarity in early mammalian devel-
opment. Current opinion in genetics and develop-
ment , 9(4):417–21, 1999.
[6] R. L. Gardner. Speciﬁcation of embryonic axes
begins before cleavage in normal mouse develop-
ment. Development , 128(6):839–47, 2001.
[7] R. L. Gardner. The axis of polarity of the mouse
blastocyst is speciﬁed before blastulation and in-
dependently of the zona pellucida. Human repro-
duction , 22(3):798–806, 2007.
[8] R. L. Gardner and T. J. Davies. An investigation
of the origin and signiﬁcance of bilateral symme-
try of the pronuclear zygote in the mouse. Human
reproduction , 21(2):492–502, 2006.Eric Werner, Stem cell networks 46
[9] P. H. Jones, B. D. Simons, and F. M. Watt. Sic
transit gloria: farewell to the epidermal transit am-
plifying cell? Cell stem cell , 1(4):371–81, 2007.
[10] C. J. Logothetis and S. H. Lin. Osteoblasts in
prostate cancer metastasis to bone. Nat Rev Can-
cer, 5(1):21–8, 2005.
[11] M. Nakada, D. Kita, T. Watanabe, Y . Hayashi,
L. Teng, I. V . Pyko, and J.-I. Hamada. Aber-
rant signaling pathways in glioma. Cancers ,
3(3):3242–3278, 2011.
[12] M. Shackleton. Melanoma stem cells–are there
devils in the detail? Pigment cell &melanoma
research , 23(5):693–4, 2010.
[13] M. Shackleton. Moving targets that drive can-
cer progression. The New England journal of
medicine , 363(9):885–6, 2010.
[14] M. Shackleton. Normal stem cells and cancer stem
cells: similar and di erent. Seminars in cancer bi-
ology , 20(2):85–92, 2010.
[15] M. Shackleton and E. Quintana. Progress in under-
standing melanoma propagation. Molecular on-
cology , 4(5):451–7, 2010.
[16] A. Sonnenschein, C. & Soto. The Society of Cells,
Cancer and control of cell proliferation . Bios Sci-
entiﬁc Publishers, 1999.
[17] P. J. Tesar, J. G. Chenoweth, F. A. Brook, T. J.
Davies, E. P. Evans, D. L. Mack, R. L. Gardner,
and R. D. McKay. New cell lines from mouse epi-
blast share deﬁning features with human embry-
onic stem cells. Nature , 448(7150):196–9, 2007.
[18] J. E. Till, E. A. McCulloch, and L. Siminovitch. A
stochastic model of stem cell proliferation, based
on the growth of spleen colony-forming cells. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America , 51:29–36, 1964.[19] J. J. Tyson. Modeling the cell division cycle: cdc2
and cyclin interactions. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A ,
88(16):7328–32, 1991.
[20] J. J. Tyson, K. C. Chen, and B. Novak. Sni ers,
buzzers, toggles and blinkers: dynamics of regula-
tory and signaling pathways in the cell. Curr Opin
Cell Biol , 15(2):221–31, 2003.
[21] E. Werner. In silico multicellular systems biology
and minimal genomes. DDT , 8(24):1121–1127,
2003.
[22] E. Werner. Genome semantics, in silico multicel-
lular systems and the central dogma. FEBS Let-
ters, 579(7):1779–1782, 2005.
[23] E. Werner. How central is the genome? Science ,
317(5839):753–754, 2007.
[24] E. Werner. Evolutionary embryos. Nature. ,
460(7251):35, 2009.
[25] E. Werner. Meaning in a quantum universe. Sci-
ence, 329(5992):629–630, 2010.
[26] E. Werner. On programs and
genomes. arXiv:1110.5265v1 [q-bio.OT] ,
http://arxiv.org /abs/1110.5265, 2011a.
[27] E. Werner. Cancer networks: A general theo-
retical and computational framework for under-
standing cancer, http: //arxiv.org /abs/1110.5865.
arXiv:1110.5865v1 [q-bio.MN] , pages 1–121,
2011b.
[28] E. Werner. The origin, evolution and de-
velopment of bilateral symmetry in multicellu-
lar organisms. arXiv:1207.3289v1 [q-bio.TO] ,
http://arxiv.org /abs/1207.3289, 2012a.