Title: A simple spectroscopic technique to identify rejuvenating galaxies
Abstract:   Rejuvenating galaxies are unusual galaxies that fully quench and then
subsequently experience a "rejuvenation" event to become star-forming once
more. Rejuvenation rates vary substantially in models of galaxy formation:
10%-70% of massive galaxies are expected to experience rejuvenation by z = 0.
Measuring the rate of rejuvenation is therefore important for calibrating the
strength of star formation feedback mechanisms. However, these observations are
challenging because rejuvenating systems blend in with normal star-forming
galaxies in broadband photometry. In this paper, we use the galaxy spectral
energy distribution (SED)-fitting code Prospector to search for observational
markers that distinguish normal star-forming galaxies from rejuvenating
galaxies. We find that rejuvenating galaxies have smaller Balmer absorption
line equivalent widths (EWs) than star-forming galaxies. This is analogous to
the well-known "K + A" or post-starburst galaxies, which have strong Balmer
absorption due to A-stars dominating the light: in this case, rejuvenating
systems have a lack of A-stars, instead resembling "O - A" systems. We find
star-forming galaxies that have H$\beta$, H$\gamma$, and/or H$\delta$
absorption EWs $\lesssim 3${\AA} corresponds to a highly pure selection of
rejuvenating systems. Interestingly, while this technique is highly effective
at identifying mild rejuvenation, "strongly" rejuvenating systems remain nearly
indistinguishable from star-forming galaxies due to the well-known stellar
outshining effect. We conclude that measuring Balmer absorption line EWs in
star-forming galaxy populations is an efficient method to identify rejuvenating
populations, and discuss several techniques to either remove or resolve the
nebular emission which typically lies on top of these absorption lines.

Full Text: Draft version July 14, 2023
Typeset using L ATEXtwocolumn style in AASTeX631
A simple spectroscopic technique to identify rejuvenating galaxies
Junyu Zhang,1, 2, 3Yijia Li,1, 2, 3Joel Leja,1, 2, 3Katherine E. Whitaker,4, 5Angelos Nersesian,6Rachel Bezanson,7
and Arjen van der Wel6
1Department of Astronomy & Astrophysics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
2Institute for Computational & Data Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
3Institute for Gravitation and the Cosmos, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
4Department of Astronomy, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA
5Cosmic Dawn Center (DAWN), Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Jagtvej 128, København N, DK-2200, Denmark
6Sterrenkundig Observatorium, Universiteit Gent, Krijgslaan 281 S9, 9000 Gent, Belgium
7Department of Physics and Astronomy and PITT PACC, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
ABSTRACT
Rejuvenating galaxies are unusual galaxies that fully quench and then subsequently experience a “re-
juvenation” event to become star-forming once more. Rejuvenation rates vary substantially in models
of galaxy formation: 10%-70% of massive galaxies are expected to experience rejuvenation by z= 0.
Measuring the rate of rejuvenation is therefore important for calibrating the strength of star forma-
tion feedback mechanisms. However, these observations are challenging because rejuvenating systems
blend in with normal star-forming galaxies in broadband photometry. In this paper, we use the galaxy
spectral energy distribution (SED)-fitting code Prospector to search for observational markers that
distinguish normal star-forming galaxies from rejuvenating galaxies. We find that rejuvenating galax-
ies have smaller Balmer absorption line equivalent widths (EWs) than normal star-forming galaxies.
This is analogous to the well-known “K + A” or post-starburst galaxies, which have strong Balmer
absorption due to A-stars dominating the light: in this case, rejuvenating systems have a lack of A-
stars, instead resembling “O - A” systems. We find star-forming galaxies that have H β, Hγ, and/or H δ
absorption EWs ≲3˚A corresponds to a highly pure selection of rejuvenating systems. Interestingly,
while this technique is highly effective at identifying mild rejuvenation, “strongly” rejuvenating systems
remain nearly indistinguishable from star-forming galaxies due to the well-known stellar outshining ef-
fect. We conclude that measuring Balmer absorption line EWs in star-forming galaxy populations
is an efficient method to identify rejuvenating populations, and discuss several techniques to either
remove or resolve the nebular emission which typically lies on top of these absorption lines.
Keywords: Galaxy evolution (594); Galaxy formation (595); Green valley galaxies (683); Star formation
(1569); Galaxy accretion (575); Post-starburst galaxies (2176)
1.INTRODUCTION
It has long been observed that the optical colors of
galaxies are bimodal (e.g., Strateva et al. 2001; Baldry
et al. 2004). This is true in both the local universe
and at higher redshift (e.g., Bell et al. 2004; Franzetti
et al. 2007; Whitaker et al. 2011; Straatman et al. 2016).
Galaxy populations can be divided by this bimodality
into two dominant regions: the “blue cloud” and “red
sequence”. The blue cloud is mainly populated by star-
forming galaxies, while the red sequence is mainly pop-
ulated by quiescent galaxies which show little ongoing
star formation. There is also a transition area called the
“green valley” that separates the blue cloud from the redsequence (e.g., Strateva et al. 2001; Fang et al. 2012;
Salim 2014). Many studies show the number density
of quiescent galaxies increases as the universe gets old
(Pozzetti et al. 2010; Brammer et al. 2011; Moustakas
et al. 2013; Muzzin et al. 2013; Leja et al. 2022), which
suggests that galaxies evolve from being star-forming to
quiescent.
However, some quiescent galaxies may experience “re-
juvenation”, with a secondary burst of star formation
after a long period of low-level star formation. Through
the rejuvenation event, galaxies in the red sequence
may be able to return to the green valley and occasion-
ally even to the blue cloud (e.g., Rowlands et al. 2018;arXiv:2211.10450v2  [astro-ph.GA]  13 Jul 20232 Zhang et al.
Chauke et al. 2019). The nature of this rejuvenation
process is still poorly understood, although gas accre-
tion during gas-rich minor mergers and smooth accre-
tion from the intergalactic medium (IGM) are thought
to be possible triggers of the rejuvenation process (e.g.,
Kaviraj et al. 2009; Fang et al. 2012; Dressler et al. 2013;
Rowlands et al. 2018). Understanding the rejuvenation
process is crucial because it can help better constrain the
wide range of star formation regulation prescriptions in
theoretical models of galaxy formation.
Observations of rejuvenating galaxies suggest that the
frequency of rejuvenation is low and possibly redshift-
dependent. Rejuvenation appears to happen more fre-
quent in the local universe, with ∼10%-30% of early-
type galaxies at z <0.1 showing evidence of rejuvena-
tion (Treu et al. 2005; Schawinski et al. 2007; Donas
et al. 2007; Thomas et al. 2010). Furthermore, there
are hints that rejuvenation happens less frequently at
high redshift. Recent high-redshift observations suggest
that <1-16% of high stellar mass quiescent galaxies
(logM∗>11M⊙) have experienced past rejuvenation
events, depending on the definition of a rejuvenation
(Belli et al. 2017; Chauke et al. 2019; Tacchella et al.
2022; Woodrum et al. 2022). In addition, Akhshik et al.
(2021) found a rejuvenating galaxy at z = 1.88 and esti-
mated that only about 1% of massive quiescent galaxies
at 1 <z<2 are possibly rejuvenating. However, due
to the different methodologies and definitions, it is hard
to determine the consistency between these studies, or
establish a true global rejuvenation rate.
Rejuvenation rates can be measured more easily in
simulations of galaxy formation. Rodiguez-Montero
et al. (2019) demonstrate in the Simba simulation that
the frequency of rejuvenation is much lower than the
rate of mergers and quenching events, suggesting it is a
sub-dominant process in the quiescent population. The
frequency of rejuvenation is found to be higher in both
intermediate mass galaxies regardless of redshift and low
mass galaxies of low redshift, which is consistent with
the aforementioned observational results. Alarcon et al.
(2022) have shown that 40%-70% of massive z= 0 galax-
ies experience a rejuvenation event in UniverseMachine
(Behroozi et al. 2019), while the rate in IllustrisTNG
(Pillepich et al. 2017; Springel et al. 2017; Nelson et al.
2017) is only ∼10%. We note, however, that since there
is no universal quantitative definition of rejuvenation,
there is some uncertainty in comparing the fractions of
rejuvenation from different studies.
However, finding galaxies that are undergoing reju-
venation, is extremely challenging since rejuvenating
galaxies are likely to be highly degenerate with the reg-
ular star-forming population in colors from broadbandphotometry. In addition to the specific star formation
rate (sSFR = SFR/ M∗), metallicity and dust attenua-
tion can also significantly affect the color of a galaxy,
further scrambling the relationship between color and
past star formation activity. Moreover, the UV upturn
phenomenon caused by hot evolved helium-burning stars
can make galaxies with low recent star formation lie in
the blue side in FUV-V color (Jeong et al. 2009), which
further complicates the interpretation of galaxy color at
low redshift. We caution that the techniques used to es-
timate rejuvenation frequency vary dramatically in each
of the aforementioned observational studies, and an ac-
curate observational census across redshift will require
a consistent approach. This is the goal of this paper.
In the past decade, numerous techniques have been
created to separate star-forming and quiescent galaxy
populations. Rest-frame color-color diagrams, notably
the UVJ diagram (Williams et al. 2009) and the NUVrK
diagram (Arnouts et al. 2013), are widely employed to
distinguish between quiescent and star-forming galaxies,
since they are able to place approximate constraints on
sSFR (e.g., Wang et al. 2017; Leja et al. 2019a). Addi-
tionally, spectroscopic features such as D n4000 and H δ
absorption line equivalent width (EW) are utilized to
diagnose the age of stellar populations and to help de-
termine if galaxies have experienced recent star bursts
(Kauffmann et al. 2003; Borgne et al. 2006; Kauffmann
2014; Maltby et al. 2016; Wu et al. 2018). These spectral
diagnostics can be used to identify types of recent star
formation such as post-starburst galaxies (Suess et al.
2022), and so in this work we investigate whether such
techniques can be also used to differentiate the rejuve-
nating population from the normal star-forming popu-
lation. In this paper, we employ the Bayesian inference
machine Prospector (Leja et al. 2017; Johnson et al.
2022; Johnson et al. 2021) to simulate SEDs of reju-
venating and star-forming populations at z= 0.7 and
search for the possible observational characteristics of
the rejuvenating population.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 and
3, we describe the SED model for generating simulated
galaxy populations and how we measure the EW and
Dn4000. In Section 4, we generate the model rejuve-
nating and star-forming populations. In Section 5, we
present the observational characteristics of the rejuve-
nating population we find in our simulated populations,
and propose a new spectroscopic identification criteria
for rejuvenating galaxies, while also identifying the con-
taminants. In Section 6, we discuss the advantages and
limitations of our technique. Finally, in Section 7, we
summarize our conclusions.A simple spectroscopic technique to identify rejuvenating galaxies 3
2.SED MODELING
For this work, we employ the Prospector Bayesian
inference framework (Leja et al. 2017; Johnson et al.
2022; Johnson et al. 2021) and the Flexible Stellar Pop-
ulation Synthesis (FSPS; Conroy et al. 2009; Conroy &
Gunn 2010) code to simulate galaxy SEDs. We adopt
the physical model Prospector −αdescribed in Leja et al.
(2017, 2019b), which uses isochrones based on MIST
stellar tracks (Choi et al. 2016; Dotter 2016). The phys-
ical model defines fixed and free parameters for gen-
erating the SED, plus their associated priors. Model
SEDs of star-forming and rejuvenating populations are
generated by drawing from the priors for free parame-
ters in this model. Here we briefly introduce the fea-
tures included in this model with a special emphasis on
the changes made for generating realistic populations of
normal star-forming and rejuvenating galaxies. The de-
tailed model parameters and priors are described in Leja
et al. (2019b).
The Prospector −αmodel includes a two-component
dust attenuation model with a flexible attenuation
curve, dust emission powered via energy balance, and
free stellar metallicity. This model also includes a 7-bin
nonparametric star formation history (SFH). The non-
parametric SFH is necessary for this work as it allows a
galaxy to increase in SFR after an initial period of quies-
cence, making it possible to create rejuvenating galaxies
in the simulation.
We make a few changes to the Prospector −αmodel
to remove the effects of spectral renormalization and
emission lines, and simplify the definition of rejuvenat-
ing population. First, in our modified Prospector −α
model, we fix the model redshift to 0.7 to make it con-
sistent with the redshift of the LEGA-C data (van der
Wel et al. 2016), since we aim to use the LEGA-C data
to verify our results in the future. Furthermore, since
the total mass formed mostly affects the normalization
of the SEDs and we do not want to select rejuvenating
galaxies from their masses, we fix the total mass formed
at 1010M⊙to remove the impact of a variable mass on
the model SEDs. In addition, we combine the first two
fixed age bins (0 - 30 Myr and 30 - 100 Myr) to sim-
plify our calculation of the average sSFR in the last 100
Myr. This means we do not marginalize over any rapid
changes in star formation rate in the last 100 Myr.
We also turn off nebular emission, because nebular
emission in galaxies is often difficult to interpret due
to complex dust distributions and uncertain ionization
sources. This means we are searching for observational
signatures of rejuvenation which are solely stellar in na-
ture. We discuss the effects of this change further in
Section 6. Gas metallicity is also no longer a free pa-rameter since nebular emission is off. Other parameters
in Prospector −αmodel such as dust attenuation are free
and follow the prior described in Leja et al. (2019b). Ta-
ble 1 lists all free parameters and their associated priors
for the modified Prospector −αphysical model used in
this paper.
3.MEASUREMENTS OF SPECTRAL FEATURES
As in the identification of post-starburst (or “K + A”)
galaxies, Balmer absorption lines EW and D n4000 are
promising diagnostics for the identification of variable
SFRs. Hence, we prepare to investigate their potential
in distinguishing rejuvenating galaxies using our simu-
lated populations. We describe here how we measure
Balmer absorption line EWs and D n4000.
We measure the H β, Hγand H δEWs in our simu-
lated populations using the following steps. First, we
fit the spectra from 4000 ˚A to 5000 ˚A with a 4thde-
gree polynomial to determine the continuum (i.e., C(λ))
near H β, Hγand H δlines. We mask 4071-4131 ˚A, 4290-
4370 ˚A, 4600-4750 ˚A and 4831-4891 ˚A, since the spec-
tra usually show strong absorption lines at these wave-
lengths. As the next step, we subtract the continuum
from the spectra and fit the difference with a Voigt pro-
file (i.e., Voigt( λ)), which is the convolution of a Lorentz
profile and a Gaussian profile, and is frequently applied
to examine the spectral broadening of hydrogen Balmer
lines (e.g., Luque et al. 2003; Tremblay & Bergeron 2009;
Falcon et al. 2015; Wu et al. 2022). Finally, we integrate
Voigt( λ)
C(λ)to get the EW,
EW =−ZVoigt( λ)
C(λ)dλ. (1)
By doing the profile fitting, we can make sure our EW
measurements consistent.
For the measurement of D n4000, we adopt the Balogh
et al. (1999) definition: the ratio between the average
flux density Fνbetween 4000 and 4100 ˚A and that be-
tween 3850 and 3950 ˚A.
4.CREATING A SIMULATED STAR-FORMING &
REJUVENATING POPULATION
To better understand how star-forming and rejuvenat-
ing galaxies behave differently in photometry and spec-
tra, we randomly draw model SEDs from the priors of 11
free parameters from our modified Prospector −αmodel
discussed in Section 2, and then define rejuvenating and
normal star-forming galaxies by their sSFRs in differ-
ent age bins. We simulate 25,000 rejuvenating galaxies
and 25,000 star-forming galaxies in total based on the
following criteria:4 Zhang et al.
Table 1. Free Parameters and Their Associated Priors for the modified Prospector −αPhysical Model
Parameter Description Prior
log(Z/Z⊙) Stellar metallicity TopHat: min = -1.0, max = 0.19
log(SFR ratios) Ratio of the SFRs in adjacent bins of the six-bin nonparametric SFH (five parameters total) Student’s t-distribution with mean = 0, σ= 0.3 and ν= 2
ˆτ2 Diffuse dust optical depth Clipped normal: min = 0, max = 2, mean = 0.3, σ= 1
ˆτ1 Birth-cloud dust optical depth Clipped normal in ( ˆτ1/ˆτ2): min = 0, max = 2, mean = 1, σ= 0.3
n Power-law modifier to the shape of the Calzetti et al. (2000) attenuation curve TopHat: min = -1.0, max = 0.4
fAGN AGN luminosity as a fraction of the galaxy bolometric luminosity Log-uniform: min = 10−5, max = 3
τAGN Optical depth of AGN torus dust Log-uniform: min = 5, max = 150
•Normal star-forming galaxy:
sSFR 100−1000Myr >10−11yr−1;
sSFR 0−100Myr >10−10yr−1
•Rejuvenating galaxy:
sSFR 100−1000Myr <10−11yr−1;
sSFR 0−100Myr >10−10yr−1.
where sSFR 0−100Myr and sSFR 100−1000Myr stand for the
sSFR averaged over the most recent 100 Myr and the
sSFR averaged over 100 Myr to 1000 Myr respectively.
In other words, all objects we have drawn are currently
star-forming, but rejuvenating ones were quiescent 100-
1000 Myr ago.
In Figure 1 we show the median SFHs of simulated
star-forming and rejuvenating populations. The light
blue and light orange region represent the 16% to 84%
range of the SFR of the star-forming and rejuvenating
populations in each age bin, respectively. Unlike the
normal star-forming population, the rejuvenating popu-
lation has an “U-shape” SFH which indicates that they
return from being quiescent to star-forming.
It is important to note that in our simulation the re-
juvenating population is undergoing a stronger burst of
star formation on average (i.e., higher sSFR 0−100Myr )
compared to the normal star-forming population. This
difference is expected and can be explained by our
parameter settings: as we fix the total stellar mass
formed in the model and set the upper limit on
sSFR 100−1000Myr of rejuvenating galaxies, the rejuvenat-
ing population is forced to have high sSFR 0−100Myr to
meet the total stellar mass formed. However, we do
not want to select rejuvenating galaxies based on their
higher sSFRs, as that would render this exercise mean-
ingless. To make a fair comparison, we instead assume
that the rejuvenating population follows the similar
sSFR 0−100Myr distribution as the normal star-forming
population. For this purpose, we reweigh the rejuve-
nating samples by drawing rejuvenating samples based
on weights from the distribution of normal star-forming
samples. Hence, the distribution of rejuvenating sam-
ples’ sSFR 0−100Myr is consistent with that of the normal
Figure 1. The median SFHs of the simulated star-forming
population (blue line) and rejuvenating population (orange
line). The light blue and light orange region represent the
16% to 84% range of the SFR in each age bin. The re-
juvenating population is reweighted by the distribution of
sSFR 0−100Myr of star-forming population and therefore, the
median SFRs of two populations are matched with each
other in the 0-100 Myr age bin. The red dashed line rep-
resents a constant SFH and the green line represents our
star-forming criterion in the most recent age bin. Since we
require star-forming galaxies to have a higher SFR than the
green line, the resulting median star-forming SFH rises with
cosmic time.
star-forming sample in the simulation. This reweighing
can be seen in the rightmost age bin of Figure 1, where
the median SFRs of rejuvenating and star-forming pop-
ulation coincide with each other. Note that in the later
sections of this paper, the simulated rejuvenating pop-
ulation always refers to the sSFR-weighted simulated
rejuvenating population, unless otherwise specified.
It is noteworthy that the model star-forming popu-
lation has a median rising SFH in Figure 1. To illus-
trate the reason, we draw a constant SFH (red) and
the star-forming criterion (green) in the most recent age
bin. Since we require star-forming galaxies to have a
higher SFR than the green line, the resultant median
SFH which meets this criterion rises with time.A simple spectroscopic technique to identify rejuvenating galaxies 5
5.RESULTS
5.1. The Observational Characteristics of Rejuvenating
Galaxies
In this section, we use the model star-forming and re-
juvenating populations to search for observational char-
acteristics to separate the two. First, we look for differ-
ences in the broadband colors.
Figure 2. The median spectra of star-forming (black) and
rejuvenating (blue) populations, normalized by the average
flux density between 4000 ˚A and 4400 ˚A of each spectra. The
grey and light blue regions represent the 16% to 84% range of
the normalized flux density of star-forming and rejuvenating
populations respectively. This illustrates the extreme chal-
lenge of selecting rejuvenating systems by their photometry
colors alone
In Figure 2 we show the median spectra of the simu-
lated star-forming and rejuvenating populations. For a
better comparison, the median spectra were normalized
by the average flux density between 4000 ˚A and 4400 ˚A.
The grey and light blue regions represent the 16% to 84%
range of the normalized flux density of star-forming and
rejuvenating populations respectively. It can be seen
that the simulated rejuvenating and star-forming popu-
lations have almost identical range of broadband colors
within ±1σregion, which implies the color difference is
not sufficient to differentiate rejuvenating galaxies from
normal star-forming galaxies.
This result makes sense and can be explained in two
ways. First, the broadband colors of galaxies are deter-
mined not only by their sSFR, but also their dust, metal-
licity and longer-term variations in their SFHs (see, e.g.,
Conroy 2013 and references therein). Thus, the effect of
sSFR on the broadband colors of rejuvenating galaxies
can be washed out by the variations of other parame-
ters. Second, it is hard to tell from broadband colorsalone whether a galaxy in the “green valley” is undergo-
ing quenching or rejuvenation. As we mentioned before,
rejuvenating galaxies are likely to be in green valley (see,
e.g., Chauke et al. 2019; Akhshik et al. 2021). However,
when the star-forming galaxies have their star forma-
tion quenched, they will also pass through the green
valley on their way to becoming completely quiescent.
Hence, those recently quenching galaxies can have indis-
tinguishable broadband colors from rejuvenating galax-
ies.
Figure 2 demonstrates that broadband colors alone
are not able to identify the rejuvenating population, so
we now turn to spectra. In the top panel of Figure 3,
we show the median spectra of rejuvenating and star-
forming populations from 4000 ˚A to 5000 ˚A. To high-
light the differences in absorption lines between the two
populations, we normalize spectra by dividing their in-
dividual continua before taking the median. It can be
seen that the rejuvenating population shows relatively
weaker Balmer absorption lines compared to the star-
forming population. The physical driver of the Balmer
absorption line EWs difference will be further discussed
in Section 5.2. Here we draw an analogy with post-
starburst galaxies. These “E + A” or “K + A” galaxies
have a significant drop in SFR ∼100 - 500 Myr ago,
and show strong Balmer absorption lines which indicates
strong recent star formation but weak ongoing star for-
mation (Zabludoff et al. 1996; Dressler et al. 1999; Goto
2005; Brown et al. 2009; French et al. 2015; Suess et al.
2022). Since the rejuvenating population is currently
star-forming but was nearly dead between 100 Myr and 1
Gyr, it is expected to contain fewer A-type stars (which
have the strongest Balmer absorption lines) relative to
the star-forming population. Therefore, it is reasonable
that the spectra of rejuvenating galaxies are likely to
demonstrate features of “O - A” galaxies such as weak
Balmer absorption lines.
However, the key question is whether this difference
is strong enough to differentiate individual rejuvenating
galaxies from normal star-forming galaxies. The bottom
row of Figure 3 shows the EW histograms of H β, Hγand
Hδfor the rejuvenating and star-forming populations.
In agreement with the top panel, the rejuvenating pop-
ulation shows small EWs of Balmer absorption lines,
while the star-forming population exhibits a broad dis-
tribution centered at large EWs. Figure 3 suggests that
we can select rejuvenating galaxies based on their small
Balmer absorption line EWs, even though the mod-
est overlapping region may contaminate the selection.
Therefore, we conclude here that weak Balmer absorp-
tion lines is one observational characteristic of the reju-
venating population that can differentiate them from the6 Zhang et al.
Figure 3. (Top) The median spectra of rejuvenating (red) and star-forming (black) populations from 4000 ˚A to 5000 ˚A with
Hβ λ4861 ˚A, Hγ λ4340 ˚A and H δ λ4101 ˚A marked. To normalize the spectra, we divide each spectrum by their continuum and
then take the median value. The light red and grey regions represent the 16% to 84% range of the normalized flux density of
rejuvenating and star-forming populations respectively. We use a Gaussian filter with σ= 3 pixels to smooth the spectra for
presentation purposes
. (Bottom) Histograms of EW of H β, Hγand H δfor rejuvenating (orange) and star-forming (blue) populations. The
rejuvenating sample is sSFR-weighted as described in Section 4.
normal star-forming population in our simulated galax-
ies. Contaminants and Balmer EW-based criteria to dis-
tinguish star-forming and rejuvenating populations will
be further discussed in Section 5.3.
It is worth noting that other Balmer lines also have
distinguishing power and we choose these three Balmer
lines for observational reasons only: they are all strong
and within the LEGA-C spectral window. By using
three Balmer lines we can also beat down observational
errors of an individual EW measurement. This point is
further discussed in Section 5.3.5.2. Why Balmer Absorption Helps In Identifying
Rejuvenating Galaxies
In this section, we employ simple stellar populations
(SSPs), which are coeval stellar population with a homo-
geneous metallicity and abundance pattern (e.g., Con-
roy 2013), to explore the dependence of EW of Balmer
absorption lines on age and metallicity. In Figure 4
we show the evolution of the EWs of H β, Hγand H δ
over time with two sets of stellar metallicities. We only
choose two metallicities here, one solar and the other
sub-solar, to span a reasonable range of metallicities;A simple spectroscopic technique to identify rejuvenating galaxies 7
super-solar looks almost identical to solar (Mannucci
et al. 2010).
Figure 4 reveals two important pieces of information.
First, we note that the EWs of all three Balmer ab-
sorption lines peak in the age range of approximately
100 Myr to 1 Gyr. This result nicely explains why, in
Figure 3, our model star-forming galaxies have larger
Balmer absorption line EWs compared to model reju-
venating galaxies. Due to the continuing strong star
formation, star-forming galaxies have more stars with
intermediate age (i.e., 100-500 Myr) in Figure 4. Hence,
they show stronger Balmer absorption lines in spectra.
In contrast, rejuvenating galaxies do not have that pop-
ulation of stars and so have weaker Balmer absorption
lines.
Another key result we obtain from Figure 4 is that
metallicity generally does not affect our selection via
Balmer absorption line EW. For these two stellar popu-
lations with different metallicities, their Balmer absorp-
tion lines EWs both approximately peak in the same age
range, although the lower metallicity results in a weaker
peak. Hence, while it is effective to distinguish rejuve-
nating galaxies regardless of their metallicities through
Balmer absorption lines EW, lower metallicity may lead
to more contaminants.
5.3. Efficiency of Detecting Rejuvenating Galaxies
Although Figure 3 shows that relatively weak Balmer
absorption lines are a signature of the rejuvenating pop-
ulation, it is important to understand the source of the
contaminants in the bottom panels of Figure 3. In Fig-
ure 5, we show EW of H βversus sSFR 100−1000Myr for
the rejuvenating and star-forming populations. Ob-
jects are color-coded by their ratio of sSFR 0−100Myr to
sSFR 100−1000Myr , which is referred to as the strength
of rejuvenation. As we indicate in Figure 5, due to
the sSFR cuts we use to classify rejuvenating and star-
forming populations, these two different populations are
naturally separated.
There are two important notes about our construction
of Figure 5: firstly, we do not use the sSFR-weighted
rejuvenating population in this plot, since the distribu-
tion of sSFR 0−100Myr for the rejuvenating population is
implicitly shown by combining the y-axis and the color-
coding of the plot. Secondly, we examine the other two
Balmer absorption lines and find that they give the same
information. Therefore, we only draw the plot for H β
here, but the results for H γand H δare similar. The
reason why all three Balmer absorption lines contain
the same information is explained later in this section.
It is interesting that when considering the strength
of rejuvenation (indicated by the sSFR ratio), the EWsof the rejuvenating and star-forming populations show
opposite trends. As the strength of rejuvenation in-
creases, the EW of H βfor the rejuvenating population
goes up while that of the star-forming population de-
creases. This is mainly due to the criteria we put on
sSFR 100−1000Myr . When the sSFR ratio increases for
the star-forming population, that means they are closer
to quiescent at 100-1000 Myr, thus they start to look
like rejuvenating galaxies. However, when it comes to
the rejuvenating population, a larger sSFR ratio means
that they have a lot more recent SFR of young stars
which outshine the older stars. Increasing the ratio adds
more sources of EWs. Therefore, for the rejuvenating
population, stronger rejuvenation means larger EWs for
Balmer absorption lines.
Figure 5 can be thought of as the key figure of this
paper since it demonstrates both detectable rejuvenat-
ing galaxies and the most common contaminant popula-
tion. We here adopt similar definitions as Alarcon et al.
(2022) for strong and mild rejuvenating galaxies. We
use log(sSFR0−100Myr
sSFR100−1000Myr)>2 to define strong rejuvenat-
ing galaxies and log(sSFR0−100Myr
sSFR100−1000Myr)>1 &<2 to define
mild rejuvenating galaxies. The EW distribution of the
rejuvenating population shows that strong rejuvenating
galaxies have relatively large EWs and resemble star-
forming galaxies with slightly weaker Balmer absorption
lines, which are likely themselves experiencing mild re-
juvenation. This suggests that the Balmer EW selection
is most efficient at identifying mild rejuvenating galax-
ies. Additionally, the distribution of star-forming popu-
lation indicates the contaminants which overlap with the
rejuvenating population in the bottom panel of Figure
3, are mostly normal star-forming galaxies undergoing
weak rejuvenation and were not quiescent between 100
Myr and 1000 Myr. Finally, the rejuvenating popula-
tion has a smaller lower bound in EW compared to the
star-forming population. This means that despite the
presence of contaminants, we can still find a parameter
space which is solely occupied by the rejuvenating pop-
ulation in our simplified simulation, under the assump-
tion that the star-forming population and the quiescent
population can be easily differentiated by other tech-
niques such as rest-frame color-color diagrams. This is
consistent with the conclusion we draw from Figure 3.
In Figure 6, we show the interrelationship of the EW
of Hβ, Hγand H δfor rejuvenating and star-forming
populations. The color coding represents the density of
each population. Figure 6 demonstrates that different
Balmer absorption lines show similar contrast between
the rejuvenating and star-forming galaxies. Since they
are all Balmer absorption lines, they are governed by
analogous physics and, therefore, react similarly to the8 Zhang et al.
Figure 4. Time evolution of EW of H β, Hγand H δ(from left to right) at a given metallicity. The blue and orange lines
represent log Z/Z⊙= -1.25 and log Z/Z⊙= 0, respectively.
Figure 5. EW of H βversus sSFR 100−1000Myr for rejuvenating and star-forming populations. Points are color-coded by their
ratio of sSFR 0−100Myr to sSFR 100−1000Myr . We can identify galaxies experiencing mild rejuvenation by applying a reasonable
cut in the EW, but galaxies experiencing strong rejuvenation start to blend in with the star-forming galaxy population
changing stellar age. For this reason, it is feasible to
lower the observational uncertainty by combining mul-
tiple Balmer absorption lines.
5.4. Hδvs D n4000
A popular way to categorize galaxies is via the
Dn4000-H δplane (e.g., Kauffmann et al. 2003; Borgne
et al. 2006; Kauffmann 2014; Maltby et al. 2016; Wu
et al. 2018; Dhiwar et al. 2023). To investigate howdifferent types of galaxy populations are located in
the D n4000-H δplane, we also include model quiescent
and post-starburst populations here for comparison pur-
poses. We do not include the model quiescent and post-
starburst populations in previous sections, since we al-
ready have effective methods such as rest-frame color-
color diagrams to separate recent star-forming from qui-
escent galaxies and post-starburst galaxies. The quies-A simple spectroscopic technique to identify rejuvenating galaxies 9
Figure 6. (From left to right) The density plot of H γvs Hβ, Hγvs Hδand H δvs HβEWs for rejuvenating (orange) and
star-forming populations (blue). This figure shows that different Balmer absorption lines have the same information. This is
due to the fact that they are all Balmer absorption lines, and so are governed by analogous physics and respond similarly to
changing stellar age. In this way, it is possible to mitigate the observational error by measuring multiple Balmer absorption
lines and averaging them.
cent galaxy population and post-starburst galaxy pop-
ulation are defined as:
•Quiescent galaxy:
sSFR 0−100Myr <10−11yr−1;
sSFR 100−1000Myr <10−10yr−1.
•Post-starburst galaxy:
sSFR 0−100Myr <10−11yr−1;
sSFR 100−1000Myr >10−10yr−1;
This means that we allow quiescent galaxies transit from
the green valley between 100 Myr and 1 Gyr in lookback
time, i.e. they can quench recently.
Figure 7 shows model star-forming, rejuvenating,
quiescent galaxies, and post-starburst galaxies on the
Dn4000-H δplane and the two contours in each pop-
ulation represent 1 σand 2 σregions respectively. We
weight our model rejuvenating population by the
sSFR 0−100Myr in this contour plot. Figure 7 demon-
strates that the rejuvenating population predominantly
lives in the bottom-left corner of the D n4000-H δplane
in our simulation.
Figure 7 depicts the top-left corner of the D n4000-H δ
plane as being populated by model star-forming galax-
ies, whereas the bottom-right corner is populated by
model quiescent galaxies. This is consistent with Figure
6(b) of Wu et al. (2018) result based on the LEGA-C
galaxies. Furthermore, Figure 7 shows the simulated re-
juvenating galaxies have a small D n4000. This is due
to their strong star formation over the past 100 Myr.
On the contrary, in Figure 7, post-starburst galaxies
exhibit strong Balmer absorption lines because of their
high SFRs ∼500 Myr ago, but due to their weak current
Figure 7. The distribution of model star-forming (blue), re-
juvenating (orange), quiescent (red), and post-starburst (vi-
olet) populations on the D n4000-H δplane. The two contours
in each population represent 1 σand 2 σrespectively.
star formation, they also show relatively larger D n4000.
As a result, Figure 7 suggests that it is possible to em-
ploy reasonable cuts on the D n4000-H δplane to separate
rejuvenating galaxies from other galaxy populations.
5.5. Verification with the LEGA-C survey
Here we verify that such a population of rejuvenating
galaxies as suggested by our model may exist in the data
from the LEGA-C survey (van der Wel et al. 2016; van
der Wel et al. 2021). The LEGA-C survey is a spec-
troscopic survey observed ∼4,000 galaxies in the COS-
MOS field at a redshift range of 0.6 <z<1.0 with
VLT/VIMOS. Each galaxy in the survey was observed10 Zhang et al.
Figure 8. The distribution of 1,429 LEGA-C galaxies on
the D n4000-H δplane, after removing AGNs and low S/N
(i.e. average S/N < 10˚A−1) sources. The black window
represents the proposed selection criteria: H δEW<2.3˚A &
Dn4000 <1.4. We also overplot the contours of Figure 7 for
the comparison purpose.
for∼20 hours, resulting in spectra with S/N∼20˚A−1
and resolution R∼3500. Such a high resolution allows
us to resolve emission within absorption lines.
Since many sources in the LEGA-C survey do not have
rest-frame coverage of H βor Hγ, it is difficult to improve
the purity of our selection by combining the EW criteria
of multiple Balmer absorption lines. Therefore, we in-
stead examine how LEGA-C galaxies are distributed on
the D n4000-H δplane. Based on Figure 7, we can select
a highly pure rejuvenating populations by using H δEW
<2.3˚A and D n4000 <1.4 in our simple simulation. We
adopt these two values as the cutoffs on the D n4000-
Hδplane to select potential rejuvenating galaxies in the
LEGA-C data. Since we note that active galactic nu-
cleus (AGN) and noisy spectra may contaminate our se-
lections, we remove 5 types of AGN (i.e. MEx (Juneau
et al. 2011), mid-IR, radio, X-ray, and broad-line) and
lowS/N (i.e. average S/N < 10˚A−1) sources from the
LEGA-C data, which leaves 1,429 sources with available
Dn4000 and H δmeasurements. In Figure 8, we show
the distribution of these 1,429 LEGA-C galaxies on the
Dn4000-H δplane. The cutoffs that we use are repre-
sented by the black lines. In addition, we overplot the
contours of Figure 7 in Figure 8 to make the comparison
of the parameter space better.
As seen in Figure 8, there are 14 galaxies within our
cutoffs for rejuvenating galaxies, indicating that at least
some galaxies matching with these selection criteria ex-
ist, though full SED-fitting is required to confirm thatthese are indeed rejuvenating galaxies. Since the LEGA-
C team uses lick indexes (Worthey et al. 1994; Worthey
& Ottaviani 1997) rather than the profile fitting to mea-
sure the EW, we caution that EW measurement offset
between lick indexes and profile fitting will likely need
to be addressed in order to ensure robust selection. Fur-
thermore, we also note that superpositions of unrelated
objects on the sky can produce potential contaminates.
For example, the superposition of a star-forming galaxy
and a quiescent galaxies can mimic the spectral feature
of a rejuvenating galaxy. In spite of the above poten-
tial contaminates, we do not expect many rejuvenating
galaxies at z=0.7 as our discussion in Section 1. The
confirmation of even one rejuvenating galaxy or no reju-
venating galaxies in the LEGA-C data would be valuable
for understanding the star-formation regulation process
in a cosmological context. In a future study, we will
take a detailed investigation on the rejuvenating can-
didates in the LEGA-C data, and report on the purity
and completeness of our selection criteria, by fitting the
LEGA-C data with a nonparametric SFH (Nersesian et
al. in prep).
6.DISCUSSION
6.1. Searching for rejuvenating systems in large-scale
spectroscopic surveys
In the previous sections, we demonstrate that rejuve-
nating galaxies tend to have small D n4000 features and
weak Balmer absorption lines. Here we will describe how
to efficiently find such objects in large spectroscopic sur-
veys.
The main challenge for characterizing the frequency
of rejuvenating galaxies with our technique is emis-
sion line infilling, which occurs because Balmer line
emission in star-forming galaxies will typically render
the underlying absorption inaccessible. This is an im-
portant limitation because separating rejuvenating and
star-forming galaxies requires measuring their Balmer
absorption depths to within an accuracy of ∼1˚A as
demonstrated in this work, but these absorption lines
are often buried under emission lines with width ∼5−50
˚A. Measuring and removing this nebular emission is rela-
tively easier to deal with by using the medium-resolution
VLT/VIMOS LEGA-C spectra R∼3500) because the
spectra are sufficiently high resolution as to be able to
separate measurements of Balmer absorption and emis-
sion, but harder in more typical moderate resolution sur-
veys (e.g., Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS, R= 1500 at
3800 ˚A and = 2500 at 9000 ˚A, Abdurro’uf et al. 2022)),
where there is more blending. Crucially, these moderate-
resolution surveys cover larger volumes needed to give
the best constraints on number densities of rejuvenat-A simple spectroscopic technique to identify rejuvenating galaxies 11
ing galaxies. One promising upcoming survey is the
Prime Focus Spectrograph survey (PFS, R= 2300-5000,
Greene et al. 2022), which covers a wide area and mod-
erate spectral resolution, though the S/N for most expo-
sures will not be as high as LEGA-C. Another promising
option is the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument sur-
vey (DESI, R= 2000-5500, DESI Collaboration et al.
2016), which is ongoing now.
One possible solution to the challenge is employing
the Balmer decrement (Calzetti et al. 2000; Brinchmann
et al. 2004; Garn & Best 2010; Price et al. 2014) (e.g.,
Hα/Hβ) to estimate the emission line fluxes. Since the
atomic properties of hydrogen are well understood, the
relative strengths of the Balmer emission lines can be
well determined if we know the number of ionizing pho-
tons. We can tell the amount of reddening due to dust
from the ratio of two Balmer emission line luminosities,
as their intrinsic luminosity ratio can be calculated from
theory. If we assume a dust reddening curve we can then
obtain the dust attenuation at any given wavelength.
Then we can predict the integrated flux in any of the
Balmer emission lines. Finally, the Balmer absorption
line fluxes can be calculated by subtracting the emission
line fluxes from the spectra.
Spectral flux calibration problems can make long-
wavelength baselines challenging to interpret (e.g.,
Hα/Hβ). However, this can be mitigated by using ad-
jacent emission lines (e.g., H δ/Hγ), though the shorter
wavelength baseline here makes the relationship to dust
attenuation more subtle.
Ultimately, this technique would rely on a tradeoff
between a flux-calibration-sensitive long-baseline and a
less dust-sensitive short baseline. Therefore, our tech-
nique can also be applied to surveys that have relatively
deep spectra but not high resolution, if they have a wide
range of wavelengths to include as many Balmer lines as
possible and have continuum detected to calculate EWs.
6.2. Effect of Stellar Population Synthesis (SPS)
Models on EW Measurement
The choice of SPS models can have an impact on the
value of EW as a function of age/metallicity of the SSP.
Groves et al. (2012) use different stellar population syn-
thesis models to investigate the dependence of Balmer
absorption line EWs on age and metallicity. Their re-
sults mostly agree with our Figure 4, which conclude
that the Balmer absorption line EWs show a strong de-
pendence on age but weak dependence on metallicity. It
is also consistent with our results that all of their Balmer
absorption line EWs peak at 0.5 - 1 Gyr and that the
peak age varies slightly with metallicity.However, we notice that the ranges of EWs shown in
Groves et al. (2012) are different from ours. Their re-
sults show peak EWs are typically 20% - 70% larger
than our results, with the larger difference occuring at
younger ages. We cannot establish whether this is due
to the methodology of measuring EWs or the choice of
SPS models. That being said, in Groves et al. (2012),
they find the variation between SPS models is at the 2x
level at fixed age/metallicity, which is likely consistent
with variation between SPS models. Therefore, when
applying our technique, it will be important to empiri-
cally calibrate the EW threshold for rejuvenating galax-
ies by comparing to independent techniques for identi-
fying these objects, as discussed in the next section.
6.3. Comparison to other techniques for identifying
rejuvenating galaxies
There are several other methods proposed in the lit-
erature to identify rejuvenating galaxies. One possi-
ble way is to identify rejuvenation events via measuring
the spatial distribution of metallicity within early-type
galaxies, as early-type galaxies with recent star forma-
tion are found to be more metal-poor than quiescent
early-type galaxies due to their metal-poor young stellar
populations (i.e., Werle et al. 2020; Jeong et al. 2021).
However, this approach only identifies a certain type of
rejuvenation, i.e., rejuvenation triggered by metal-poor
gas inflow.
Another widely used method is nonparametric SFH
analysis (e.g., Chauke et al. 2019; Woodrum et al. 2022),
where the SFH of galaxies is directly inferred via SED-
fitting. This is the most direct approach, but is often
computationally expensive because SED-fitting includes
many parameters accounting for the complex physics in
galaxies. Moreover, results of SED-fitting are sensitive
to the adopted priors, which are not always tuned to
find rejuvenating systems (Leja et al. 2019b). Further-
more, Akhshik et al. (2021) mention that rejuvenation
events can occur in both the outskirts and the center of
galaxies, depending on the triggers of the rejuvenation
process. Hence, if rejuvenation occurs in the center, a
spatially resolved spectrum is required.
This study shows that rest frame spectral coverage
of 4000-5000 ˚A proves highly efficient at identifying re-
juvenating systems with a nonparametric SFH analy-
sis. Nonparametric SFH analysis can help confirm the
“quick” results from simply measuring Balmer EWs; our
method can give us a useful heuristic and fast way to
identify these systems. As a result, our technique com-
plements SFH inference by showing the Balmer lines are
crucial for identifying systems.12 Zhang et al.
Nevertheless, our method has some limitations. For
example, as we discuss in Section 6.1, measuring Balmer
absorption line EWs is best performed at sufficient res-
olution to resolve emission within absorption lines. Low
resolution can make it hard to separate absorption lines
from emission lines and so reduces the accuracy of
Balmer absorption line EWs measurements. This limi-
tation can be mitigated if the survey includes multiple
Balmer emission lines and the continuum is detected.
As we show in Figure 5, since strong rejuvenat-
ing galaxies resemble star-forming galaxies experiencing
mild rejuvenation in the Balmer absorption lines EWs,
our methods are most efficient in the selection of mild
rejuvenating galaxies. Therefore, the completeness of
selection could be a concern if we require a high purity
of strong rejuvenating galaxies. However, we note that
Alarcon et al. (2022) show that both the UniverseMa-
chine and IllustrisTNG predict many mild rejuvenation
events whereas strong ones are rare. If mild rejuvenation
events also dominate in the real universe, our inability
to identify strongly rejuvenating systems would be sig-
nificantly less important.
6.4. Contrast in the Distribution of Rejuvenating
Galaxies between Simulations and Real Universe
In our simulated populations, we assume equal num-
bers of rejuvenating galaxies and star-forming galaxies,
and thus purity/completeness calculations performed on
this population implicitly assume these two galaxy pop-
ulations have the same number density. However, as
we discuss in Section 1, the frequency of rejuvenation is
very low in the real universe. If there are 20 times more
star-forming galaxies then most “rejuvenating” candi-
dates selected from our technique will be false ones with
a EW criterion of high completeness. Therefore, the
real distribution of rejuvenating galaxies in the universe
can be a concern for our technique. To examine how
the real distribution of rejuvenating galaxies in the uni-
verse affects our technique, we reduce the percentage of
rejuvenating galaxies in our simulation. We find that
when the percentage of the rejuvenating population is
reduced to ∼4% of the total number of star-forming
galaxies, the density of the rejuvenating population be-
comes comparable with the density in the wings of the
star-forming distribution. This means that there may
be more star-forming contaminants in the real Universe;
however, this is only a rough prediction due to the un-
known true distribution of recent star formation histo-
ries in star-forming galaxies. A future step is to cal-
ibrate our purity and completeness limits by estimat-
ing observed number densities with nonparametric SFH
analyses.6.5. The Effect of Extra Dust Attenuation Around
Young Star-forming Regions
In our simulated populations, we employed a two-
component dust model (Charlot & Fall 2000) to compute
the effects of dust on the integrated spectral properties
of galaxies. In brief, dust has two components in our
model: one is the optical depth of the diffuse dust (i.e.,
ˆτ2) and the other is the optical depth of the birth cloud
dust (i.e., ˆ τ1). Young stars are attenuated not only by
dust in the ambient interstellar medium, but also by
dust in their birth clouds. It is worth noting that in our
model, ˆ τ2is a free parameter and ˆ τ1is sampled from
another free parameter, dust ratio (i.e.,ˆτ1
ˆτ2). Therefore,
ˆτ1is not fixed in our model.
We notice that ˆ τ1has impacts on the EW in our
model. In Figure 9, we show the variation of EW of
Hδas a function of ˆ τ1for both the simulated rejuvenat-
ing and star-forming populations. We find a Spearman
coefficient ∼0.274 for the rejuvenating system, which
increases to ∼0.477 if we require a high ˆ τ1and EW,
while the star-forming system has a Spearman coeffi-
cient∼0.117. This result indicates that the EW of Hδ
is strongly correlated with ˆ τ1in the simulated rejuve-
nating system, where the correlation becomes stronger
at high ˆ τ1and EW, while the correlation is much weaker
in the simulated star-forming system.
This is due to the fact that ˆ τ1only affects the
youngest stars, which are the main sources of contin-
uum in the simulated rejuvenating population, whereas
the older stars which contribute the dominant share of
the Balmer absorption are unaffected by this birth-cloud
dust. Thus, larger ˆ τ1will increase the Balmer absorp-
tion line EWs for rejuvenating population. However,
for the normal star-forming population, the continuum
has significant contributions from older stellar popula-
tions as well, and therefore, their EWs are marginally
less affected by ˆ τ1increment. On the contrary, since the
diffuse dust affects both the young and old stars, ˆ τ2has
no impact on the EW.
This result implies that large ˆ τ1will reduce the EW
contrast between rejuvenating galaxies and star-forming
galaxies, thus decreasing the purity of our technique.
However, we caution that the birth cloud dust model is
only a rough approximation for the complex star-dust
geometry in typical galaxies (see Viaene et al. 2016;
Bianchi et al. 2018; Narayanan et al. 2018; Nersesian
et al. 2019 for a review), and so while there is sig-
nificant observational support for extra attenuation to-
wards young stars, (e.g., Calzetti et al. 1994; Price et al.
2014; Reddy et al. 2015) in detail the boundary between
young and old stars in our predictive model may behave
quite differently in the real universe. Furthermore, theA simple spectroscopic technique to identify rejuvenating galaxies 13
Figure 9. HδEW for simulated rejuvenating and star-forming populations as a function of the amount of birth-cloud dust
(i.e. ˆτ1). The H δEWs of the rejuvenating population increase with ˆ τ1, while the trend for the star-forming population is much
weaker, for reasons discussed in 6.5. Increasing levels of extra dust around young stars in galaxies has the potential to marginally
decrease the purity of the Balmer EW selection of rejuvenating systems.
amount of dust in rejuvenating systems and star-forming
system may be different in the real universe than our
simple model; this question can be answered once we
more closely examine candidates in a large survey.
7.CONCLUSION
In this work, we investigate the observational char-
acteristics of simulated rejuvenating and star-forming
populations at z= 0.7 using the modified Prospector −α
SED model. We first demonstrate that the star-forming
and rejuvenating galaxies have nearly identical broad-
band colors in our simulation, suggesting that color-
color diagrams cannot distinguish between the two types
of galaxies. Next, we show that the model rejuvenating
galaxies have weaker Balmer absorption lines than the
model star-forming galaxies. This is because rejuvenat-
ing galaxies had recently been quenched, which leaves
them with fewer A-type stars which are distinguished
by strong Balmer absorption lines, so called “O - A”
galaxies.
We find that there is a small fraction of star-forming
contaminants that have weak Balmer absorption lines
similar to those of the rejuvenating population, visible
in the bottom panel of Figure 3. We look into these con-
taminants and come to the conclusion that star-forming
galaxies which undergo weak rejuvenation, without in
fact having experienced quiescence, have similar Balmer
absorption lines EW to rejuvenating galaxies that un-
dergo strong rejuvenation. Therefore, we claim thatBalmer absorption line EWs are primarily efficient in
identifying weak or mild rejuvenating galaxies.
In addition to the weak Balmer absorption lines, a re-
gion in the D n4000-H δplane is found to be almost com-
pletely populated by the rejuvenating galaxies. The re-
juvenating population exhibits weak Balmer absorption
lines due to recent quenching, and has low D n4000 due
to relatively high ongoing star formation rate. Figure
7 demonstrates that, at least in our simulation, rejuve-
nating galaxies can be chosen with reasonable purity by
placing suitable cutoffs in the D n4000-H δplane.
Based on the above results, this study offers an ef-
ficient technique to identify rejuvenating populations
through measuring Balmer absorption line EWs. More-
over, this technique provides an intuitive guide for the
expected outcome of SED-fitting results. Understand-
ing this technique will also help in survey design such as
what range of wavelengths should be detected to better
observe rejuvenating populations. However, our tech-
nique also has some limitations. First, high resolution
spectral data like LEGA-C are required to separate the
Balmer absorption from the Balmer emission. If a sur-
vey does not have a high enough resolution but mea-
sures multiple Balmer emission lines and the continuum,
Balmer decrements can also be employed to calculate
Balmer emission EWs and thus the absorption EWs.
Second, as we discuss herein, the proposed technique is
primarily efficient at selecting mild rejuvenating galax-
ies.14 Zhang et al.
Although both Balmer absorption lines EW and the
Dn4000-H δplane exhibit high purity selection criteria in
our models, purity resulting from these criteria are yet to
be tested on real data. In order to confirm whether the
candidates are actually rejuvenating galaxies, detailed
SED-fitting is still essential for measuring metallicities
and reconstructing the detailed SFHs.
A logical next step is to use this technique to estimate
the number density of rejuvenating systems in LEGA-C
survey, and to characterize their detailed SFH and abun-dances. It will additionally be useful to compare the re-
sults from the quick-look observational selection criteria
presented here to results from detailed SFH modeling
from the LEGA-C survey.
We thank the anonymous referee for their helpful com-
ments, which greatly improved the paper. Computa-
tions for this research were performed on the Pennsyl-
vania State University’s Institute for Computational and
Data Sciences’ Roar supercomputer.
REFERENCES
Abdurro’uf, Accetta, K., Aerts, C., et al. 2022, ApJS, 259,
35, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac4414
Akhshik, M., Whitaker, K. E., Leja, J., et al. 2021, The
Astrophysical Journal Letters, 907, L8,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/abd416
Alarcon, A., Hearin, A. P., Becker, M. R., &
Chaves-Montero, J. 2022, Diffstar: A Fully Parametric
Physical Model for Galaxy Assembly History, arXiv,
doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2205.04273
Arnouts, S., Floc’h, E. L., Chevallard, J., et al. 2013, A&A,
558, A67, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201321768
Baldry, I. K., Glazebrook, K., Brinkmann, J., et al. 2004,
The Astrophysical Journal, 600, 681, doi: 10.1086/380092
Balogh, M. L., Morris, S. L., Yee, H. K. C., Carlberg,
R. G., & Ellingson, E. 1999, The Astrophysical Journal,
527, 54, doi: 10.1086/308056
Behroozi, P., Wechsler, R. H., Hearin, A. P., & Conroy, C.
2019, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 488, 3143, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz1182
Bell, E. F., Wolf, C., Meisenheimer, K., et al. 2004, The
Astrophysical Journal, 608, 752, doi: 10.1086/420778
Belli, S., Genzel, R., Schreiber, N. M. F., et al. 2017, The
Astrophysical Journal, 841, L6,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aa70e5
Bianchi, S., Vis, P. D., Viaene, S., et al. 2018, A&A, 620,
A112, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201833699
Borgne, D. L., Abraham, R., Daniel, K., et al. 2006, The
Astrophysical Journal, 642, 48, doi: 10.1086/500005
Brammer, G. B., Whitaker, K. E., van Dokkum, P. G.,
et al. 2011, The Astrophysical Journal, 739, 24,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637x/739/1/24
Brinchmann, J., Charlot, S., White, S. D. M., et al. 2004,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 351,
1151, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2004.07881.x
Brown, M. J. I., Moustakas, J., Caldwell, N., et al. 2009,
The Astrophysical Journal, 703, 150,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637x/703/1/150Calzetti, D., Armus, L., Bohlin, R. C., et al. 2000, The
Astrophysical Journal, 533, 682, doi: 10.1086/308692
Calzetti, D., Kinney, A. L., & Storchi-Bergmann, T. 1994,
ApJ, 429, 582, doi: 10.1086/174346
Charlot, S., & Fall, S. M. 2000, The Astrophysical Journal,
539, 718, doi: 10.1086/309250
Chauke, P., van der Wel, A., Pacifici, C., et al. 2019, The
Astrophysical Journal, 877, 48,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab164d
Choi, J., Dotter, A., Conroy, C., et al. 2016, The
Astrophysical Journal, 823, 102,
doi: 10.3847/0004-637x/823/2/102
Conroy, C. 2013, Annual Review of Astronomy and
Astrophysics, 51, 393,
doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-082812-141017
Conroy, C., & Gunn, J. E. 2010, The Astrophysical
Journal, 712, 833, doi: 10.1088/0004-637x/712/2/833
Conroy, C., Gunn, J. E., & White, M. 2009, The
Astrophysical Journal, 699, 486,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637x/699/1/486
DESI Collaboration, Aghamousa, A., Aguilar, J., et al.
2016, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1611.00036,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1611.00036
Dhiwar, S., Saha, K., Dekel, A., et al. 2023, MNRAS, 518,
4943, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac3369
Donas, J., Deharveng, J.-M., Rich, R. M., et al. 2007, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 173, 597,
doi: 10.1086/516643
Dotter, A. 2016, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement
Series, 222, 8, doi: 10.3847/0067-0049/222/1/8
Dressler, A., Oemler, A., Poggianti, B. M., et al. 2013, The
Astrophysical Journal, 770, 62,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637x/770/1/62
Dressler, A., Smail, I., Poggianti, B. M., et al. 1999, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 122, 51,
doi: 10.1086/313213A simple spectroscopic technique to identify rejuvenating galaxies 15
Falcon, R. E., Rochau, G. A., Bailey, J. E., et al. 2015, The
Astrophysical Journal, 806, 214
Fang, J. J., Faber, S. M., Salim, S., Graves, G. J., & Rich,
R. M. 2012, The Astrophysical Journal, 761, 23,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637x/761/1/23
Franzetti, P., Scodeggio, M., Garilli, B., et al. 2007, A&A,
465, 711, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20065942
French, K. D., Yang, Y., Zabludoff, A., et al. 2015, The
Astrophysical Journal, 801, 1,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637x/801/1/1
Garn, T., & Best, P. N. 2010, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 409, 421,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.17321.x
Goto, T. 2005, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 357, 937, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2005.08701.x
Greene, J., Bezanson, R., Ouchi, M., Silverman, J., & the
PFS Galaxy Evolution Working Group. 2022, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2206.14908.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.14908
Groves, B., Brinchmann, J., & Walcher, C. J. 2012,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 419,
1402, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.19796.x
Jeong, H., Oh, K., Joo, S.-J., & Yi, S. K. 2021, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 509, 550,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab2990
Jeong, H., Yi, S. K., Bureau, M., et al. 2009, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 398, 2028,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15238.x
Johnson, B., Leja, J., Bowman, W., et al. 2022,
bd-j/prospector: v1.1, v1.1.0, Zenodo,
doi: 10.5281/zenodo.6192136
Johnson, B. D., Leja, J., Conroy, C., & Speagle, J. S. 2021,
ApJS, 254, 22, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/abef67
Juneau, S., Dickinson, M., Alexander, D. M., & Salim, S.
2011, ApJ, 736, 104, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/736/2/104
Kauffmann, G. 2014, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 441, 2717
Kauffmann, G., Heckman, T. M., White, D. M. S., et al.
2003, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 341, 33, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2003.06291.x
Kaviraj, S., Peirani, S., Khochfar, S., Silk, J., & Kay, S.
2009, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 394, 1713
Leja, J., Johnson, B. D., Conroy, C., van Dokkum, P. G., &
Byler, N. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal, 837, 170,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa5ffe
Leja, J., Tacchella, S., & Conroy, C. 2019a, The
Astrophysical Journal, 880, L9,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab2f8cLeja, J., Johnson, B. D., Conroy, C., et al. 2019b, The
Astrophysical Journal, 877, 140,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab1d5a
Leja, J., Speagle, J. S., Ting, Y.-S., et al. 2022, ApJ, 936,
165, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac887d
Luque, J., Calzada, M., & S´ aez, M. 2003, Journal of Physics
B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics, 36, 1573
Maltby, D. T., Almaini, O., Wild, V., et al. 2016, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters, 459,
L114, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slw057
Mannucci, F., Cresci, G., Maiolino, R., Marconi, A., &
Gnerucci, A. 2010, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 408, 2115,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.17291.x
Moustakas, J., Coil, A. L., Aird, J., et al. 2013, The
Astrophysical Journal, 767, 50,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637x/767/1/50
Muzzin, A., Marchesini, D., Stefanon, M., et al. 2013, The
Astrophysical Journal, 777, 18,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637x/777/1/18
Narayanan, D., Conroy, C., Dav´ e , R., Johnson, B. D., &
Popping, G. 2018, The Astrophysical Journal, 869, 70,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaed25
Nelson, D., Pillepich, A., Springel, V., et al. 2017, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 475, 624,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx3040
Nersesian, A., Xilouris, E. M., Bianchi, S., et al. 2019,
A&A, 624, A80, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201935118
Pillepich, A., Springel, V., Nelson, D., et al. 2017, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 473, 4077,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx2656
Pozzetti, L., Bolzonella, M., Zucca, E., et al. 2010, A&A,
523, A13, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200913020
Price, S. H., Kriek, M., Brammer, G. B., et al. 2014, The
Astrophysical Journal, 788, 86,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637x/788/1/86
Reddy, N. A., Kriek, M., Shapley, A. E., et al. 2015, The
MOSDEF Survey: Measurements of Balmer Decrements
and the Dust Attenuation Curve at Redshifts z 1.4-2.6,
arXiv, doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1504.02782
Rodiguez-Montero, F., Dav´ e, R., Wild, V., Angl´ es-Alc´ azar,
D., & Narayanan, D. 2019, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 490, 2139,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2580
Rowlands, K., Wild, V., Bourne, N., et al. 2018, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 473, 1168,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1903
Salim, S. 2014, Serbian Astronomical Journal, 1,
doi: 10.2298/saj1489001s16 Zhang et al.
Schawinski, K., Kaviraj, S., Khochfar, S., et al. 2007, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 173, 512,
doi: 10.1086/516631
Springel, V., Pakmor, R., Pillepich, A., et al. 2017, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 475, 676,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx3304
Straatman, C. M. S., Spitler, L. R., Quadri, R. F., et al.
2016, The Astrophysical Journal, 830, 51,
doi: 10.3847/0004-637x/830/1/51
Strateva, I., Ivezi´ c, ˇZ ., Knapp, G. R., et al. 2001, The
Astronomical Journal, 122, 1861, doi: 10.1086/323301
Suess, K. A., Kriek, M., Bezanson, R., et al. 2022, The
Astrophysical Journal, 926, 89,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac404a
Tacchella, S., Finkelstein, S. L., Bagley, M., et al. 2022, The
Astrophysical Journal, 927, 170,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac4cad
Thomas, D., Maraston, C., Schawinski, K., Sarzi, M., &
Silk, J. 2010, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.16427.x
Tremblay, P.-E., & Bergeron, P. 2009, The Astrophysical
Journal, 696, 1755
Treu, T., Ellis, R. S., Liao, T. X., et al. 2005, The
Astrophysical Journal, 633, 174, doi: 10.1086/444585
van der Wel, A., Noeske, K., Bezanson, R., et al. 2016, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 223, 29,
doi: 10.3847/0067-0049/223/2/29
van der Wel, A., Bezanson, R., D’Eugenio, F., et al. 2021,
ApJS, 256, 44, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac1356Viaene, S., Baes, M., Bendo, G., et al. 2016, A&A, 586,
A13, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201527586
Wang, W., Faber, S. M., Liu, F. S., et al. 2017, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 469, 4063,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1148
Werle, A., Cid Fernandes, R., Vale Asari, N., et al. 2020,
MNRAS, 497, 3251, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa2217
Whitaker, K. E., Labb´ e , I., van Dokkum, P. G., et al.
2011, The Astrophysical Journal, 735, 86,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637x/735/2/86
Williams, R. J., Quadri, R. F., Franx, M., van Dokkum, P.,
& Labb´ e, I. 2009, ApJ, 691, 1879,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/691/2/1879
Woodrum, C., Williams, C. C., Rieke, M., et al. 2022,
Molecular Gas Reservoirs in Massive Quiescent Galaxies
at z∼0.7 Linked to Late Time Star Formation, arXiv,
doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2210.03832
Worthey, G., Faber, S. M., Gonzalez, J. J., & Burstein, D.
1994, ApJS, 94, 687, doi: 10.1086/192087
Worthey, G., & Ottaviani, D. L. 1997, ApJS, 111, 377,
doi: 10.1086/313021
Wu, P.-F., van der Wel, A., Gallazzi, A., et al. 2018, The
Astrophysical Journal, 855, 85,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aab0a6
Wu, Y., Chen, H., Tian, H., et al. 2022, ApJ, 928, 180,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac5897
Zabludoff, A. I., Zaritsky, D., Lin, H., et al. 1996, The
Astrophysical Journal, 466, 104, doi: 10.1086/177495