Title: Aging as a consequence of misrepair -- a novel theory of aging
Abstract:   It is now increasingly realized that the underlying mechanism which governs
aging (ageing) is a complex interplay of genetic regulation and
damage-accumulation. "Aging as a result of accumulation of 'faults' on cellular
and molecular levels", has been proposed in the damage (fault)-accumulation
theory. However, this theory fails to explain some aging phenotypes such as
fibrosis and premature aging, since terms such as 'damage' and 'fault' are not
specified. Therefore we introduce some crucial modifications of this theory and
arrive at a novel theory: aging of the body is the result of accumulation of
Misrepair of tissue. It emphasizes: a) it is Misrepair, not the original
damage, that accumulates and leads to aging; and b) aging can occur at
different levels, however aging of the body takes place necessarily on the
tissue level, but not requiring the aging of cells/molecules. The
Misrepair-accumulation theory introduced in the present paper unifies the
understanding of the roles of environmental damage, repair, gene regulation,
and multicellular structure in the aging process. This theory gives
explanations for the aging phenotypes, premature aging, the difference of
longevity in different species, and it is consistent with the physical view on
complex systems.

Full Text:  1 AGING AS A CONSEQUENCE OF MISREPAIR  
-- A NOVEL THEORY OF AGING  
  
Jicun Wang1, Thomas M. Michelitsch2*, Arne Wunderlin3 and Ravi Mahadeva1 
 
1Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke‟s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom  
2Institut Jean le  Rond d‟Alembert CNRS UMR 7190, Université Pierre et Marie Curie (Paris 6), 4 Place Jussieu, 75252 
Paris cedex 05, France  
31. Institut für Theoretische Physik, Pfaffenwaldring 57/4, D -70550 Stuttgart, Germany  
*Send correspondence to: Dr. Thomas M. Michelit sch, Email: michel@lmm.jussieu.fr  
 
27 Mars 2011  
 
ABSTRACT  
 
It is now increasingly realized that the underlying mechanism which governs aging (ageing) is a complex 
interplay of genetic regulation and damage -accumulation. “A ging as a result of accumulation of „faults‟ on 
cellular and molecular levels”, has been proposed in the damage (fault) -accumulation theory . However, this 
theory fails to explain some aging phenotypes such as fibrosis and premature aging, since terms such as 
„damage‟ and „fault‟ are not s pecified. Therefore we introduce some crucial modifications of this theory and 
arrive at a novel theory: aging of the body is the result of accumulation of Misrepair of tissue . It emphasizes: 
a) it is Misrepair, not the original damage, that accumulates an d leads to aging; and b) aging can occur at 
different levels, however aging of the body takes place necessarily on the tissue level, but not requiring the 
aging of cells/molecules. The Misrepair -accumulation theory introduced in the present paper unifies t he 
understanding of the roles of environmental damage, repair, gene regulation, and multicellular structure in the 
aging process. This theory gives explanations for the aging phenotypes, premature aging, the difference of 
longevity in different species, an d it is consistent with the physical view on complex systems.  
 
 
KEY WORDS   Aging (ageing), Damage, Misrepair, Longevity  
  
INTRODUCTION  
 
Many theories have been proposed to answer the questions  of why and how we age. These theories fall into 
two main group s: genetic regulation and damage -accumulation. The gene -controlling theories  emphasize the 
genetic controlling on aging (ageing). Many genes have been found to be related to aging, and some have 
proven to have lifespan -extending effects on animal models by  gene knock -out (or -in), however their 
associations with aging are debated and far from confirmed. The questions are, if there are such kinds of 
genes: a) how their functions are related to the variety and inhomogeneity of the phenotypes of aging? b) why 
a living being has such kinds of genes to make itself going to die? and c) since when (which age) they exert 
functions badly? Among these theories, the Mutation -accumulation Theory  assumes that the weak selection by 
nature in late age allows a wide range o f gene mutations to accumulate, with deleterious effects  (Medawar, 
1952  and Martin, 1996) : one interesting point which remains unanswered is how cells can survive and 
function well when genes mutate with  deleterious effects . The Developmental Theory  sugges ts that aging and 
development are coupled and regulated by the same mechanisms (Zwaan, 2003 and  De Magalhaes, 2005) . It is 
interesting and reasonable; however this theory does not explain how the development process influences the 
aging phenotypes. The Dam age-accumulation theories  imply that it is the extrinsic and intrinsic damage (or 
fault) -accumulation on cellular or molecular level that leads to aging: The causes can be free radicals, by -
products, molecular cross -linking and so on (Kirkwood, 2000 and H olliday, 2004).  However, most of these 
theories actually mainly pointed out the phenotypes or causes but not the underlying common mechanism  of 
aging.  
 
It is now increasingly realised that genetic regulation and damage -accumulation actually interplay to c ause 
aging, and it is predicted that : “aging is a result of accumulation of „faults‟ at cellular and molecular level 
because of the limitation of maintenance and repair; the underlying driving force is damage. The genetic  2 control of longevity comes through  the regulation of the essential maintenance and repair processes that slow 
the build –up of faults”  (Kirkwood, 2006) . However this recent damage (fault) -accumulation theory does not 
clarify the concepts of „damage‟ and „fault‟, and is weak in explaining so me aging phenomena, such as 
fibrosis and premature aging. Therefore we suggest here some crucial modifications of this theory and raise a 
novel theory of aging.  
 
A NOVEL THEORY OF AG ING  
 
Limitations of the  current damage (fault) -accumulation  theory  
 
In the above mentioned damage (fault) -accumulation theory (Kirkwood, 2006) , the terms of „damage‟ and 
„fault‟ are not clearly defined. The „damage‟ can mean the primary damage before reparation and/or the 
incomplete repair following damage. The damage can be extrinsic or intrinsic. Incomplete repair may also 
include partial repair and incorrect repair. However it is necessary to distinguish between them. For example, 
the burnt skin develops a scar. The burnt skin is the damage, and the scar is the incorrect re pair. The „fault‟ 
seems to mean the original damage which is either partially repaired or not at all repaired, by mistake due to 
the limitation of repair system. However, if the damage is left unrepaired, it will develop a life -threatening 
condition, such as bleeding, infection and organ failure, by destroying the integrity of structure, no matter 
whether the damage is on the molecular, cellular, or tissue level. Therefore, the original damage cannot remain 
unrepaired, and hence the concept of accumulation of „faults‟ is misleading.  Reparation of any damage, and 
reconstruction of the structure, is essential to maintain the integrity of structure and the basic function for 
survival: even if sometimes it is imperfect and lead to a reduction of function. In mos t cases, reparation is 
complete, so that the structure can be restored. However, incorrect repair can and even must occur in cases of 
serious or frequent injuries, where quick reparation is more important for the immediate survival than perfect 
reparation.  Typical examples include the Misrepair of DNA after double -strand breaks of DNA ( Kevin, 2004 ) 
and the scar formation . The term „Misrepair‟ appears applicable in a wider sense, not only to DNA, but also to 
other types of incorrect repair due to a similar m echanism.  
 
The concept of Misrepair  
 
We define the concept of Misrepair as the incorrect reconstruction of a structure , after  repairing the original 
damage, which can lead to a change of structure (of molecule/cell/tissue) and a reduction of function. The  
change of structure can be the change of  the kinds or amounts of functional components, and their locations or 
spatial relationships.  The comparison between damage and Misrepair is shown in Table 1. We define the term 
“damage” as the structure change befo re any reparation has taken place, whereas “Misrepair” is the change of 
structure as a result of incomplete or defective reparation. Distinguishing these two concepts is necessary to 
understand the aging mechanism, in which damage is the cause and Misrepai r is the effect. Misrepair is 
unavoidable when serious or frequent damage occurs. For example, the non -stopping mechanical movements 
of heart wall, arterial wall and skin often cause the break of muscle fibres, elastic fibres and other extracellular 
matrix es (ECMs). Misrepairs on different structures appear in different manners, such as change of DNA 
sequence, rearrangement of cytoskeleton (Garcia, 2002) , Mallory body formation, rearrangement of ECMs 
(Cook, 2000) , cellular reorganization (Eliasieh, 2007) , and tissue fibrosis. Most of the degeneration changes, 
such as hyaline degeneration ( Mallory body), mucoid degeneration , pigment particle, and calcium 
homeostasis are in fact the products of Misrepair.  
 
Table 1.  Comparison of damage and Misrepair  
 
Damage  Misrepair  
  
Physical and chemical injury on molecule/cell/tissue  Imperfect reconstruction of structure of molecule/cell/tissue  
  
Defect before reparation  Defect after reparation  
  
Removable  Permanent  
  
e.g. Injury or death of molecule/cell/tissue  
 e.g. Change of the  kinds or amounts of  functional components and  
their locations or spatial relationships   3  
Actually, apart from the Misrepair of DNA, Defective Repair, Adaptive Repair, and Molecular and Cellular 
Reorganisation , which have similar meanin g to Misrepair, have been recognised in cells and molecules 
(Bansal, 2003, Cenacchi, 2005, and Eliasieh, 2007) . A tissue Misrepair hypothesis was also raised to explain 
the radiation carcinogenesis  (Kondo, 1991 ).  However the importance of Misrepair mechan ism was not 
sufficiently emphasized and its association with aging has not yet been studied. Here we discuss mainly the 
importance of Misrepair in aging.  
 
Misrepair occurs no matter how capable the gene -regulated reparation and -maintenance system is, sin ce 
reparation – many steps of biochemical reactions – needs time. Misrepair is a result of the active reparation 
processes beneficial for survival, but not by mistake due to the limitation of repair system. Therefore the 
maintenance and repair system does NOT SLOW but even PROMOTES the occurrence of Misrepair if 
necessary, although a more capable repairing system means lower rate of occurrence of Misrepair. Hence the 
appearance of Misrepair gives more chance for survival of individual, by which the individu al can live at least 
up to the reproduction age, which is important for the survival of species. Therefore the Misrepair mechanism 
was selected by nature due to its evolutionary advantage.  
 
Aging is the result of accumulation of Misrepair  
 
A misrepaired s tructure cannot be „repaired‟ any more (restored to the pre -damage state) and persists as a 
„scar‟. So it is the Misrepair and not the original damage that accumulates. Therefore the term of Misrepair -
accumulation  is more appropriate than that of damage -accumulation  (Figure 1 ). Damage drives the aging 
process by triggering Misrepair. The accumulation of Misrepair leads to the gradual de -organisation of 
structure and the gradual reduction of function. Liver cirrhosis, for instance, is a result of accumulatio n of mis -
reconstruction of tissue due to the death of hepatocytes in chronic hepatises. Aging is a result of reparation, 
but not a result without reparation. Aging is necessary for body immediate survival and species survival. This 
is why evolution favours  aging mechanism. Thus Misrepair might represent the mechanism by which 
organisms are not programmed to die but to survive  (as long as possible) (Kirkwood, 2005),  and aging is just 
the price to be paid.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Comparison of Misrepair -accumulation and damage -accumulation  
  
Damage -accumulation:  due to the limitation of maintenance and repair, some damage remains partially repaired or 
unrepaired by mistake. This remained damage (fault) will accumulate and lead to aging.  Misrepair -accumulation : 
seriou s or too frequent damage triggers Misrepair in emergency to maintain the structural integrity and protect from 
immediate death. However the persistent Misrepair will accumulate and lead to aging.  
 
A structure (molecule, cell or tissue) containing Misrepai r has less repair capacity as well as other reduced 
functions, therefore a misrepaired structure is more fragile to damage, and the appearance of further Misrepair  4 is more likely. So the accumulation of Misrepair is a self -accelerating process. This is the  reason why aging 
phenotypes are not homogenous, which we can understand from the aging dots on the face.  
 
Aging of tissue  
 
Aging can occur at different levels: molecular, cellular and tissue. However, an interesting point is whether 
the aging of tissue, w hich is directly related to organ function and body lifespan, should be always due to the 
aging of cells or molecules. The intact function of tissue not only depends on the intact functions of 
cells/ECMs, but also depends on the intact collaborations (spat ial relationships) among them. If a defect from 
damage or Misrepair) occurs to the tissue structure, which affects the spatial relationships between 
cells/ECMs, the defect could cause directly a decline of tissue function. If, however, the defect occurs to  the 
cells/ECMs, there can be different outcomes depending upon the location. In tissue that can regenerate, the 
defected cells/ECMs can be removed and replaced with new cells/ECMs, and this might not necessarily affect 
tissue function. In tissue that cann ot regenerate, such as nerve tissue, the defective cells not only affect the 
cell-contributed tissue function, but also interrupt the spatial relationships amongst other functional 
cells/ECMs. Therefore, the residual non -functional cells/ECMs can be also r egarded as a defect of tissue 
structure. For instance, in Alzheimer‟s disease,  it has been realised that the corticocortical disconnection due 
to the loss of pyramidal neurons, which leads to  the communicating failure between different parts of brain  is 
the pathophysiological mechanism of Alzheimer‟s disease  (Delatour, 2004) .  
 
The change of tissue structure - the change of the spatial relationship between cells/ECMs, is sufficient for the 
reduction of tissue function, without requiring the change of the ce lls or molecules themselves. Therefore 
aging of body takes place necessarily on tissue level. It is well -known that the common feature of body aging 
is the deleterious change of tissue structure. Aging does not start only when we are very “old”, but it is a 
lifelong gradual process. One reason why some aged cells can be found in old regenerable tissue is that, the 
aged cells cannot be replaced in time, or completely, due to the reduced repair function of aged tissue. In this 
case, the aged cells are the eff ect of aging of tissue, but not the cause. In this aspect our view is the same as 
that in the Multicellular Being Chaos Theory , which suggests that it is the failure of information transmission 
in multi -cellular beings between each part that leads to aging  (Mulá, 2004),  however, this theory does not 
explain how the breakdown of information transmission occurs.  
 
 
The novel theory and its consistence with the physical view on complex system  
 
We propose that aging is the result of accumulation of Misrepair of  tissue . Distinguishing between damage 
and Misrepair clarifies what is the cause (damage) and what is the effect (Misrepair) in the aging process. 
Misrepair as an imperfect repair links the functions of gene -controlling and damage -exposure in aging. The 
concept of tissue Misrepair couples aging and development, which obey the same mechanism: tissue -
(re)construction. Therefore this theory unifies the multi -factors in aging mechanism.  
 
Likewise, we also predict tha t the aging of a cell is the result of accumulation of Misrepair of intracellular 
structure. Many of degeneration forms of cells, such as fatty change, Mallory body, and pigment particle, are 
kinds of Misrepair, in which the dead components are not degrade d, but isolated to prevent their toxicity to 
cells. The destiny of an aged cell can be, or cleared and replaced by new cell, or isolated by fabric structure 
when un -degradable, or to transform later into a tumour cell if a critical mutation on DNA occurs.  
 
Our interpretation is consistent with the physical view on complex system. In terms of the Second Law of 
Thermodynamics, entropy always increases in a closed system. Living system overcomes the entropy increase 
by metabolism and exchanging energy/substanc e with environment. Entropy actually characterizes the degree 
of disorganization. Living beings continuously need to release entropy to protect them from running into 
thermodynamic equilibrium (death) ( Niedermueller, 1990, Haken , 1990, and Wunderlin, 1992) . However the 
entropy increases unavoidably due to the un -removable Misrepair. Therefore it is the Misrepair that accounts 
for the permanent increase of entropy. In addition, in the spirit of the physical theory of complex systems  
(Haken , 1990, and Wunderl in, 1992) , living beings must be conceived as complex self -organised systems  
(Kiss,  2009 ). The characteristics of complex systems are their „emergent‟ properties and functions, which are  5 qualitatively different from those of their subsystems. Hence some pr operties of living beings such as 
longevity and aging cannot be only explained by the properties of their subsystems such as cells and 
molecules  (Richter, 2002) .  
 
INTERPRETATION OF AG ING PHENOTYPES AND L ONGEVITY IN THE LIGH T OF THE 
NOVEL THEORY  
 
Aging -related disorders  
 
Fibrosis is a typical phenotype of aging, existing in many old tissues, such as lung, heart muscle and arterial 
wall, which is unexplainable by the damage -accumulation theory. However, in our view, fibrosis is the result 
of accumulation of over-produced ECMs or intracellular fibre -like components for repairing, essential for 
survival by limiting the damage, linking the break, isolating the un -degradable cells or by -products, and 
reconstructing the structure, which is more robust. For example , in Alzheimer‟s disease,  the neurofibrillary 
tangles in brain are kinds of fibrosis structures to isolate the damaged components within nerve cells and the 
amyloid plaques are kinds of fibrosis -like structures with  amyloid  to isolate the damaged nerve fib res.  
 
Atherosclerosis  is an aging -related chronic inflammation disease, and the formation of plaques is the result of 
the over -proliferation and accumulation of macrophages for clearing the lipid in the arterial wall and repairing 
the endothelium when the  endothelium is frequently damaged due to the movements of arterial wall or blood 
flows . This could be one underlying mechanism of the effect of the caloric restriction on retarding aging  
(Masoro, 2005) . Some studies showed that long -term low -dose of Aspir in is helpful to reduce heart attack 
(Hung, 2003 and Elwood, 2006 ). The effect of Aspirin on inhibiting the Atherosclerosis might be one 
mechanism.   
 
Aging -related tumours  are the results of mutations due to the accumulation of Misrepair of DNA, which 
leads to the out -of-control of cell proliferation and finally to tissue disorganization. Actually in many cases, 
the mutations of DNA cause cell death, and not affect the tissue function. However, the unrepaired or 
misrepaired DNA damage has been implicated as  a causal factor in cancer and aging (Suh, 2006 ). It is now 
accepted that the misrepaired DSBs are the main lesions at the origin of both chromosomal abnormalities and 
gene mutations (Natarajan, 1993 and  Bishay; 2001 ). Misrepair of DNA is one survival mech anism of cell 
under radiation (Rothkamm, 2002).  The lack of cancer in simpler organisms  (Campisi, 2000)  might be 
because their lifespans are too short to accumulate sufficient Misrepairs of DNA.  
 
Wrinkle formation  
 
It is well -known that the elastic struct ures are gradually replaced by collagen  structures with aging in many 
organs, such as airway wall, stomach wall, blood vessel wall and skin. On skin this change leads to the 
formation of wrinkle.  Figure 2  shows a schematic representation of the changes of elastic tissue in the process 
of wrinkle formation. Firstly when the elastic fibres in skin are repeatedly broken, some of them are replaced 
by collagen fibres by Misrepair; further when the collagen fibres are repeatedly broken during shrinking, some 
of them are replaced by shorter fibres (Misrepair); with time, more and more elastic fibres are replaced by 
collagen fibres with different lengths (Misrepair -accumulation), which gradually leads to the reduction of 
extension potential and the permanent folding  of some longer fibres - wrinkle formation (aging).  
 
  6 
 
 
Figure 2. The formation of wrinkle  
 
Firstly when the elastic fibres are repeatedly broken, some of them are replaced by collagen fibres by Misrepair. Further 
some of the collagen fibres are replaced by shorter ones (Misrepair) when the brokens take place during shrinking. With 
time more and more elastic fibres are replaced by collagen fibres with different lengths (Misrepair -accumulation), which 
lead to the reduction of extension potential and the per manent folding of some longer fibres - wrinkle.  
 
 
Premature (accelerated) aging  
 
Development and repair are both tissue/body structure formation processes. Any element that interrupts the 
construction process, e.g. cell division and ECMs production/format ion, will affect the development/repair 
and lead to mis-construction  (imperfect construction)  and mis-reconstruction (Misrepair) of tissue/body. At 
this point, the aging and the development procedures are regulated by a similar genetic mechanism (Zwaan, 
2003 and  De Magalhaes, 2005) . This mis-construction  and mis-reconstruction  could be the mechanism of 
premature (accelerated) aging due to gene mutation. In the pre -matured body, the imperfect tissue structure is 
with lower function and lower potential, and i t goes to failure faster. In this case, it is the accumulation of mis-
construction  (abnormal development) and accumulation of Misrepair together that lead to the failure. Most 
such individuals cannot survive until full development. The lower repair functio n, due to gene mutation and 
abnormal tissue structure, causes more frequent Misrepair. For example, the Hutchinson -Gilford Progeria  is 
caused by a gene mutation in the nuclear envelope protein Lamin A  (Dechat, 2007) . This change of lamin A 
results in the n uclear blebbing, which interrupts the DNA/RNA synthesis and affects the cell division. In 
Fibulin -5-/- aging,   mice with mutation of Fibulin -5 gene have loose and wrinkled skin, vascular 
abnormalities, and emphysema, all of which are thought to be due to t heir disorganized and fragmented elastic 
fibres, which interrupting the development and repair (Hirai, 2007) . In Premature klotho -/- aging, Kloto 
gene mutation in mice causes  multiple accelerated aging changes due to the disorder of calcium homeostasis, 
since Klotho gene encodes a type I membrane protein with homology to beta -glycosidase, which is important 
in the regulation of calcium homeostasis (Lanske, 2007) .   
  7 Genes restrict the maximum lifespan by shaping the body  
 
It is unavoidable that tissue stru cture goes finally to breakdown due to damage and Misrepair; therefore, the 
potential of tissue is the key point for longevity. Death often happens from the failure of a key tissue/organ, 
e.g. the blockage of blood vessel  in brain and heart  due to Atherosc lerosis . The maximum potential of tissue 
lies in the complexity and maintenance of the tissue structure. More complex structures often have more 
compensational potential in function due to their repeated and network structures. This could be the reason 
why species with bigger body/brain size often, although not always, has longer longevity (Aziz, 2005).  It will 
be interesting to compare the structural complexities between different species‟ to explain the difference of 
longevity. Genes predetermine this pot ential by controlling the development. Therefore gene configuration 
restricts the maximum lifespan by shaping the body. Longer living species‟ often have a longer development 
time for their more complex functionality and need longer time for accumulating s ufficient Misrepair. This 
may be the mechanism explaining why different species‟ have different maximum life -spans. An exception is 
the big difference in the lifespan between the queen and the worker ants (also in the case of bees): in spite of 
the same ge ne configurations. However, the queen and the workers undergo different developments, which 
lead to different body structures. In C. elegans , an alternative ( dauer)  developmental pathway results in a 
significant longer lifespan (Klass, 1976). These example s indicate that it could be the difference of body 
structure that finally and directly determines the difference of maximum longevity. Some plants such as most 
trees, and animals such as ant queen, continue to develop after reproduction, therefore they obt ain additional 
structure complexity and additional function. This increase of complexity enables them to live longer.  
 
It is possible that nature develops longer -living species by increasing the body complexity; however, if the 
lifespan is too long, indiv iduals would die before the reproduction age, which would lead to the extinction of 
the species. For example, the Ginkgo biloba tree is reported to be able to live more than 3000 years, and it can 
survive in extreme weather and environment; however this sp ecies is an endangered plant. The survival of 
species is the result of limited longevity and it is the best evidence of the essentiality of limited longevity.  
 
REDUCING DAMAGE -EXPOSURE IS THE FEASIBLE WAY TO DELAY AGING -RELATED 
DISEASES  
 
Although gene con figuration determines the maximum longevity of a species, the individual lifespan is more 
related to the environmental damage -exposure, and it can only be extended to a certain degree. Damage 
triggers cell reaction and inflammation, and the repeated damage -caused chronic inflammation is important 
source of Misrepair. Our theory suggests that for extending lifespan all efforts need to focus on the reduction 
of Misrepair. This can be achieved by avoiding damage exposure as far as possible, by improving living  
conditions and medical care. It is especially important to prevent repeated damage and chronic inflammation. 
To have a regular daily life including healthy diet, sufficient rest and sleep, is important for good reparation. 
At the same time, we should posi tively understand aging/Misrepair; without aging/Misrepair, we would have 
already died from once damage in young age.  
 
An „improved‟ repair system by gene -manipulation would theoretically  reduce the rate of Misrepair. However 
the repair -related genes are n umerous and they need to act collectively to get their function. Up - or down -
regulating of one or two such genes would be insufficient for the goal to improve repairing.  In this aspect, the 
living beings themselves could know better through evolution „wha t is the best‟. Manipulating these genes 
without completely understanding their functions could cause fatal danger from side effects. Those genes 
involved in repairing are also important in development. The extending of lifespan by Knock -out or Knock -in 
of some genes in animal model  such as yeast and C. elegans , is probably through redirecting the development 
(Wei,  2008) , and this alteration can potentially cause fatal defects of development (hypoplasia).  
 
Anti-inflammation could be a useful intervention t o judge whether Misrepair is the source of aging. From  our 
view,  anti-inflammation would reduce the chance of Misrepair, although it would leave some damage to be 
repaired in delay, which is dangerous. Therefore theoretically  the long -term application of l ow-dose of anti -
inflammation medicine would be helpful to reduce aging -related diseases. Some investigations have shown 
that Aspirin, an anti -inflammation medicine, has effect of „anti -aging‟, including cardio -protection and 
reduction of cancer (Elwood, 20 06). In addition,  Bulckaen et al have observed the effect of aspirin on anti - 8 aging on animal model  (Bulckaen  2008) . However the effect is not yet fully confirmed  (Kang, 2007). More 
experiments on animal models are required. One difficulty of such research is the disturbance of the side 
effects of anti -inflammation to the research result. It has to be emphasized that the side effects of anti -
inflammation could cause fatal problems such as bleeding, infection, and organ failure due to insufficient 
defense and  repair. Therefore the medicine, even if it is effective, should be only recommended to some older 
people, at least more than 50 years old, who have high risk of diseases such as vascular diseases or cancer.  
 
CONCLUSION  
 
In this paper we have proposed for  the first time the link of Misrepair with aging. Aging is the result of 
accumulation of Misrepair, and aging of body is necessarily on tissue level. Misrepair and aging is active and 
necessary for immediate survival and species survival. This theory helps  to answer the questions, such as why 
and how we age (for immediate survival and species survival by Misrepair), why aging mechanism has 
advantage in evolution, and why we have limited longevity. The following predictions can be made from this 
theory:  
 Aging of cell is the result of accumulation of Misrepair of intracellular structure.  
 The longer living species‟ have more complex body/tissue structures, which need more time to 
develop.  
 Inhibiting chronic inflammation would help reduce aging -related diseases,  but it would be 
accompanied with high risk of other diseases.    
 
REFERENCES  
1. Aziz A. Khazaeli, Wayne Van Voorhies and James W. Curtsinger. (2005) The relationship between 
life span and adult body size is highly strain -specific in Drosophila melanogaster.  Experimental 
Gerontology . 40 (5), 377  
2. Bansal D , Miyake K , Vogel SS , Groh S , Chen CC , Williamson R , McNeil PL , Campbell KP . (2003) 
Defective membrane repair in dysferlin -deficient muscular dystrophy. Nature,  423, 168  
3. Bishay K , Ory K , Olivier MF , Lebeau J , Levalois C , Chevillard S . (2001) DNA damage -related RNA 
expression to assess individual sensitivity to ionizing radiation. Carcinogenesis.  22(8), 1179   
4. Bulckaen H, Prévost G, Boulanger E, et al. (2008) Low -dose aspirin prevents age -related endothelial 
dysfunction in a mouse model of physiological aging. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol,  294, 1562  
5. Campisi, J. (2000) Aging, chromatin, and food restriction --connecting the dots. Science , 289, 2062  
6. Cenacchi G, Fanin M, De Giorgi L B and Angelini C. (2005) Ultrast ructural changes in 
dysferlinopathy support defective membrane repair mechanism. Journal of Clinical Pathology , 58, 
190 
7. Cook H,  Stephens P, K  Davies J, Harding KG and Thomas DW.  (2000) Defective Extracellular 
Matrix Reorganization by Chronic Wound Fibrobla sts is Associated with Alterations in TIMP -1, 
TIMP -2, and MMP -2 Activity. Journal of Investigative Dermatology,  115, 225  
8. Dechat, T., Shimi T, Adam SA, Rusinol AE, Andres DA, Spielmann HP, Sinensky MS, Goldman RD. 
(2007) Alterations in mitosis and cell cycl e progression caused by a mutant lamin A known to 
accelerate human aging. Proc Nat Acad Sci U S A , 104 
9. Delatour B, Blanchard V, Pradier L and Duyckaerts C.  (2004) Alzheimer pathology disorganizes 
cortico -cortical circuitry: direct evidence from a transgen ic animal model . Neurobiology of Disease,  
16,  41 
10. De Magalhaes, J., Church GM. . (2005) Gen omes optimize reproduction: aging as a consequence of 
the developmental program. Physiology (Bethesda) , 20 
11. Eliasieh K, Liets LC, Chalupa LM. (2007) Cellular reorganization in the human retina during normal 
aging. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci.  48 (6), 2824  
12. Elwood P, Longley M, Morgan G. (2006) My health: whose responsibility? Low -dose aspirin and 
older people. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther ., 4(5),  755  9 13. Gonzalo G. Garcia* and Richard A. Miller. ( 2002) Age-Dependent Defects in TCR -Triggered 
Cytoskeletal Rearrangement  in CD4+ T Cells. The Journal of Immunology , 169, 5021  
14. Haken, H. and Wunderlin, A. (1990) In Kratky K.W. und Wallner F., H. (ed.), Grundprinzipien der 
Selbstorganisation . Wiss. Buchges, Darmstadt.  
15. Hirai M, Ohbayashi T, Horiguchi M, et al. (2007) Fibulin -5/DANCE has an elastogenic organizer 
activity that is abrogated by proteolytic cleavage in vivo. The Journal of Cell Biology, 176 (7), 1061  
16. Holliday, R. and Gerontol, A. (2004) The multiple and irreversible causes of aging. Biol Sci Med Sci , 
59 
17. Hung J. (2003 ) Aspirin for cardiovascular disease prevention. Medical Issues Committee of the 
National Heart Foundation of Australia. Med J Aust , 179(3), 147 
18. Kang JH, Cook N, Manson J, Buring JE, and Grodstein F.  (2007) Low dose aspirin and cognitive 
function in the wo men's health study cognitive cohort . British Medical Journal,  334, 987  
19. Kevin CE  Little and Pierre  Chartrand.  (2004) Genomic DNA is captured and amplified during 
double -strand break (DSB) repair in human cells  Oncogene,  23, 4166  
20. Kiss HJM, Mihalik A, Nanasi  T, Ory B, Spiro Z, Soti C, Csermely P. (2009) Ageing as a price of 
cooperation and complexity: Self -organization of complex systems causes the ageing of constituent 
networks . arXiv:0812.0325v2 [q -bio.MN] 01/2009 and  BioEssays , 31 
21. Klass, M., Hirsh D.  (197 6) Non -ageing developmental variant of Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature , 260 
22. Kondo S. (1991) Tissue misrepair hypothesis for radiation carcinogenesis. J Radiat Res,  32, 1  
23. Kirkwood, T.B. and Austad, S.N. (2000) Why do we age. Nature Genet. , 408. 
24. Kirkwood, T.  (2006) Ageing: too fast by mistake.  Nature , 444. 
25. Kirkwood, T. (2005) Understanding the odd science of aging. Cell, 120. 
26. Lanske B, Razzaque MS. (2007) Premature aging in klotho mutant mice: cause or consequence? 
Ageing Res Rev,  6, 73  
27. Martin, G.M., Austad,  S. N. & Johnson, T. E. (1996) Genetic analysis of aging: role of oxidative 
damage and environmental stresses. Nature Genet. , 13. 
28. Masoro, E. (2005) Overview of caloric restriction and ageing. Mech Ageing Dev , 126 
29. Medawar, P.B. (1952) An Unsolved Problem of  Biology . Lewis, London  
30. Mulá, M.A.V. (2004) Why do we age? http://www.meucat.com/vi.html . 
31. Natarajan,A.T. (1993) Mechanisms for induction of mutations and chromosome alterations. Environ. 
Health Perspect. , 101 (suppl. 3), 225  
32. Niedermueller and Hofecker. (1990) In Kratky K.W. und Wallner F., H. (ed.), Grundprinzipien der 
Selbstorganisation . Wiss. Buchges. , Darmstadt.  
33. Richter, K. and Rost, J. -M. (2002) Komplexe Systeme . Fischer Kompakt.  
34. Rothkamm K, Löbrich M.  (2002)  Misrepair of radiation -induced DNA double -strand breaks and its 
relevance for tumorigenesis and cancer treatment (review).  Int J Oncol.  21(2), 433  
35. Suh Y , Vijg J . (2006) Maintaining genetic integrity in aging: a zero sum game. Antioxid Redox Signal. 
8(3-4), 559  
36. Wei M, Fabrizio P, Hu J, Ge H, Cheng C, Li L, Longo VD. (2008) Life span extension by calorie 
restriction depends on Rim15 and transcription factors downstream of Ras/PKA, Tor, and Sch9.  PLoS 
Genet . 4(1),  e13.  
37. Wunderlin, A. (1992) In R. Friedrich, A . W. e. (ed.), Evolution of Dynamical Structures in Complex 
Systems . Springer -Verlag, Berlin.  
38. Zwaan, B. (2003) Linking development and aging. Sci Aging Knowledge Environ , 47 