Title: Comparative Analysis of Packages and Algorithms for the Analysis of
  Spatially Resolved Transcriptomics Data
Abstract:   The technology to generate Spatially Resolved Transcriptomics (SRT) data is
rapidly being improved and applied to investigate a variety of biological
tissues. The ability to interrogate how spatially localised gene expression can
lend new insight to different tissue development is critical, but the
appropriate tools to analyse this data are still emerging. This chapter reviews
available packages and pipelines for the analysis of different SRT datasets
with a focus on identifying spatially variable genes (SVGs) alongside other
aims, while discussing the importance of and challenges in establishing a
standardised 'ground truth' in the biological data for benchmarking.

Full Text:    
 
  1 
 Comparative Analysis of Package s and Algorithms  for the Analysis of 
Spatially Resolved Transcriptomics Data  
Natalie Charitakis1, Mirana Ramialison1,2,3,* and Hieu T. Nim1,2,3,* 
1Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Parkville, VIC, Australia  
2Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia  
3Systems Biology Institu te, Clayton, VIC, Australia  
 
Correspondence to:  
natalie.charitakis@mcri.edu.au  
mirana.ramialison@mcri.edu.au  
hieu.nim@mcri.edu.au  
*co-senior authors  
Abstract  
The technology  to generate Spatially Resolved Transcriptomics (SRT) data  is rapidly being 
improved and applied to investigate a variety of biological tissues. The ability to interrogate 
how spatially localised gene expression can  lend new insight to different tissue dev elopment is 
critical, but the appropriate tools to analyse this data are still  emerging. This chapter reviews 
available packages and pipelines for the analysis of different SRT datasets with a focus on 
identifying spatially variable genes (SVGs) alongside other aims , while  discussing the 
importance of and challenges in establishing a standardised ‘ground truth’ in the biological 
data for benchmarking.     
 
  2 
  
Introduction  
Despite the natural stochasticity that can disrupt biological processes such as organ 
development, biological systems consistently produce the same gene expression pattern with 
sufficient robustness such that the embryo forms correctly (nearly) every time.  Furthermore, 
the genes typically work together in networks, requiring a systems -wide transcriptomic 
approaches to fully understand the spatial expression patterns. Many of these create well 
defined regions of cells within developing tissues  that can be ea sily reproduced, demonstrating 
how the spatial location of the gene regulatory networks is critical for proper formation of 
tissues1. Determining these networks is an active study area in the emerging field of “spatial 
biology”, and calls for specialised computational techniques, many of which have been 
developed very recently.  
The merits  and limitations  of single cell RNA Sequencing (scRNA -Seq) have been well 
established2,3 and the method successfully applied across varying organs and conditions4–10. 
scRNA -Seq is capable of identifying rare cell populations, including in disease states and 
developmental stages , however the method  yields  noisy, variable data wi th lots of technical 
variation11. Despite scRNA -Seq allowing the study of cellular heterogeneity and cell type 
hierarchy, the loss of spatial  information prevents the systematic study of physiological 
structure/function relationships in various tissues and organs. This  was part of the drive  in the 
developm ent of spatial transcriptomics (ST)12 (now commercialised  by 10x Genomics  under 
the name Visium ) and other spatially resolved transcriptomics  (SRT)  methods . The spatially -
resolved  gene expression  pattern  within the context of a tissue is critical to achieving full 
understanding of disease states and tissue development and function  and the ability  to 
investigate this is achievable  using  SRT13.    
 
  3 
 Spatial transcriptomics is an area that is becoming more widely used and will continue to 
expand in the upcoming years12. Having been featured as Nature's Method of the Year in 2020, 
the technology and th e analytical opportunities it provides are going keep grow ing rapidly12. 
As demonstrated by Figure 1 , the number of papers published on spatial transcriptomics has 
greatly increased  since 2016  when the first technology  named ‘spatial transcriptomics’ was 
published13. Offering unprecedented spatial context to transcriptomic  data it presents an 
invaluable tool for study ing tissues  and their cellular composition.  As early as 2017, the merits 
of applying SRT to the discovery of spatial organisation of gene expression to improve 
transcriptional classification of cell types and localisation within a tissue  had been discussed  
and even put to the test14,15. The potential applications of this technology are continuously 
improving and expanding, as demonstrated by the integration of different meth ods to improve 
the resolution of current S RT methods16. The different techniques available to generate S RT 
data and their merit s have been discussed14,17 –19 a review of data analysis tools is as of yet 
lacking.  With an emphasis on obtaining spatially resolve d data sets with single cell resolution12, 
the method,  aims and approaches to integrate and analyse the data generated still in flux, with 
a clear ‘gold standard’ yet to distinguish itself.  This chapter will discuss some of the current 
packages and pipelines available to perform this analysis (Table 1).  
Methods for Downstream Analysis of Spatially Resolved Transcriptomics Data   
As identifying the spatial expression patterns of genes and how they vary across tissue is a 
critical aim of spatial transcriptomics, many purpose -built tools for analysis of this data  aim to 
identify spatially variable genes (SVGs ) (Box 1)1. Building on the concept of highly variable 
genes in scRNA -Seq analysis, SVGs have a pattern of expression  that depends o n their location 
in the tissue and can give insight into biological function20. A complication of analysing these 
spatial transcriptomics data sets is accurately accounting  for the spatial correlation across 
samples21, and different methods can be employed to tackle this problem.  Various packages    
 
  4 
 have been developed in primarily R or Python  and are currently available to identify SVGs in 
spatial transcriptomic data sets .   
Identifying Spatially Variable Genes  
Among these, SpatialDE is a popular package based on Gaussian process (GP) regression 
which can clearly identify localized gene expression patterns for data sets containing temporal 
and/or spatial annotations20. SpatialDE can recognise SVGs by creating a model with two 
different terms reflecting d istinct variance present in the data set . The first term captures the 
non-spatial variance present within the data while the second aims to capture the spatially 
related  variance of gene expression within the data set ; with the assumption that the  covariance 
between cell’s gene expression profile decreases with an increase in distance between the 
cells20. A ratio calculated using the se terms can then be used as a measure of the level of gene 
expression variance attributable to spatial20. These are the key parameters used to fit the 
Gaussian  model  in a computationally efficient manner20. Testing to prove  whether sta tistically 
significant SVGs are present is performed by comparing th is model  to a second one which 
lacks  the spatial covariance para meter that represents a data set in which spatial localisation 
has no effect on gene expression patterns20. This process is  repeated for each gene, and after 
correcting for multiple testing, the SVGs can be pulled out of the data set20. SpatialDE has the 
capability of taking this a step further  by creating models with different covariance functions 
for SVGs and comparing them,  this is in addition to the initial  10 Gaussian kernels it tests 
before selecting that with the lowest p -value . This creates  the ability to determine whether each 
SVGs  is most accurately expressed as a linear, periodic or general expression model20. 
However, for th e data to fit certain underlying assumptions of the Gaussian model, two 
normalisation steps are performed , the first being a variance stabilising transformation20,22. It 
may affect the packages performance as the assumptions underlying the model and the 
necessary data transformations do not truly reflect the nature of the data21. A further    
 
  5 
 functionality of SpatialDE is that it can implement an unsupervised learning technique built on 
the Gaussian  Mixture Model to apply automatic expression histology (AEH) which can group 
together SVGs by their spatial expression pattern using hidde n patterns learnt from the data20. 
The observation that SpatialDE may  introduce false positives by labelling genes with low levels 
of expression as SVGs is an area which requires further investigation and can be improved 
upon in future releases of the package22.  
A package with the same goal as SpatialDE is SPARK (Spatial  Pattern Recognition via 
Kernels)   that employs a generalised linear spatial model (GLSM) with different spatial kernel s 
to identify SVGs22. This model was built on previous work to take into consideration the effe cts 
of spatial correlation and covariate measurement error ; it was built and tested on 2D data 
however it is capable of being expanded to 3D data sets22. As in the case of SpatialDE, SPARK 
models gene expression for each gene across all spatial coordinates,  however this model 
operates under the assumption that the spatial data is non -Gaussian22. SPARK builds on other 
GLSMs by developing a hypothesis testing framework for the model22. The power of this 
hypothesis testing is l inked to how the spatial kernel function accurately represents the spatial 
pattern of the gene represented in the model ; and as different gene expression patterns will most 
accurately be represented by different spatial kernel functions , SPARK considers 10 different 
kernels (similarly to SpatialDE)  based on commonly observed biological patterns22. Due to the 
heuristic nature of these kernels , this process could introduce biases that lead that package to 
choose more commonly observed biological patterns.  SPARK can work with large data sets 
as it employs a penalised quasi -likelihood (PQL) algorithm  for parameter estimation to 
circumvent the pr oblem of the difficulty in solving GLSMs in short periods of time ; this 
algorithm  informs the parameters used in each of the spatial kernel functions . It further 
improves on the packages  available at time of publication,  SpatialDE and Trendsceek , by not 
performing a normalisation step on the data which decreases the power of the analysis22. A    
 
  6 
 drawback of SpatialDE that SPARK corrects for , is to control for type 1 errors  through the 
Cauchy combination rule thus giving it additional power when identifying SVGs22. The Cauchy 
combination rule groups t he p-values generated from each spatial kernel function into a single 
p value while s till controlling for type 1 errors which results in a single p -value per gene22. The 
final steps involve  controlling for FDR ac ross all p -values and then determining  which are 
SVGs22. While SpatialDE and SPARK share the use of parametric test statistics there are a few 
critical differences between the packages22.  As previously mentioned, SPARK does not model 
normal ised data , while SpatialDE can only approximate p -values , SpatialDE calculates  an 
exact p -value and once it obtains the initial se t of statistically significant genes performs 
additional analysis to determine their p -values22. Furthermore, when validated against multiple 
data sets it performed just as well or better than SpatialDE and Trendsceek  (described in next 
paragraph)22. When its ability to calculate true positives in two simulate d data set s was tested 
across a total of six  different spatial expression patterns with varying FDRs, SPARK  
outperform ed Trendsceek and had better results than SpatialDE22. While with certain simulated 
data sets, SPARK and Trendsceek performed similarly in computing well calibrated p -values, 
SpatialDE ’s  overlooked assign ing certain  true positives22. While the SPARK paper only tests 
the package’s performance against SpatialDE and Trendsceek, it outperformed  both in terms 
of number of SVGs identified when validated against a spatial transcriptomics mouse olfactory 
bulb data set22. However not all genes identified by SpatialDE overlapped with those identified 
by SPARK22. Despite this, the newly identified SVGs are in line with markers specific to the 
tissue they were annotated in and GO enrichment analysis adds further conf idence that the 
majority of these newly identified SVGs  are biologically relevant22. In terms of computational 
efficiency, when running with 10 parallel CPU threads,  SPARK was more computationally 
efficient than the same analysis run on a single -threaded SpatialDE ( although the difference in    
 
  7 
 this instance is minimal ) and Trendsceek, its single threaded performance is consistently less 
efficient  than SpatialDE across 4 datasets of varying sizes22.  
Trendsceek is one of the earlier packages developed to identify SVGs  using a nonparametric 
approach23. Trendsceek individually assesses each gene and normalises its expression through 
a log10 transformation23. It relies on a mark ed point process to model gene expression and cell 
location  and later will test the null hypothesis by generating four non -parametric test statistics23. 
These four test statistics yield four p -values, and genes with a minimum of 1 p -value ≤ 0.05 
after adjustment for multiple testing using the Benjamini -Hochberg method  is determined to 
be an SVG23. A key difference that separates Trendsceek from SpatialDE and SPARK is its 
computing of non -parametric test statistics meaning it lacks an underlying generative model. 
Trendsceek was tested against simul ated data sets and it demonstrated very low power to 
identify SVGs when they were present if less than 5% of cells in the data set had varying levels 
of expression23. This implies that as SRT datasets continue to increase in size, Trendsceek will 
not be able to distinguish SVGs present in a very small subset of cells within a tissue. When  
Trendsceek’s performance in identifying SVGs across two spatial transcriptomics data sets is 
compared to SpatialDE and SPARK, it identified  fewer SVGs , with numbers almost 10 times 
lower than the other packages22. When compared to different packages in other studies, 
Trendscreek struggled to identify SVGs in real  datasets , while other packages were able to .  
Each new package developed aims to address the shortcomings of those already published, for 
example BOOST -GP claims that many popular substitutes such as SpatialDE, SPARK and 
Trendsceek, do not  account for the substantial proportion of zero counts present in the data set 
and the effect this can have analysis21. Therefore BOOST -GP puts forth a new Bayesian 
hierarchical model aimed at accounting for the considerable number of 0 counts present in 
spatial data sets, that other packages published up to t his point had neglected21. A key 
difference to other packages is that BOOST -GP employs a negative binomial distribution when    
 
  8 
 modelling count data which should account for its observed over -dispersion21. This is more 
like the methods used by  popular bulk RNA -Seq analysis packages rather than other spatial 
transcriptomics packages explored thus far21. BOOST -GP's performance was compared to that 
of SpatialDE's, SPARK and Trendsceek when there were false zeros present in the data and 
BOO ST-GP was clearly the most adept at handling this complication, even if it still presented 
significant difficulties in retrieving a good Matthews correlation coefficient (used to determine 
the tool's accuracy) on a synthetic data set21. Furthermore, depending on the spatial pattern of 
expression of the gene, the accuracy of BOOST -GP can differ slightly21. Alternatively, when 
the tool was tested on two real data sets it was found that SPARK identified more SVGs than 
BOOST -GP, howe ver, SpatialDE discovered the least21. In the analysis of human breast cancer 
data, despite identifying fewer SVGs than SPARK, BOOST -GP was able to identify novel, 
biologically relevant terms in the GO analysis adding to its value in the analysis o f spatial 
transcriptomics data21.  
As larger datasets become increasingly common, packages must be created to efficiently 
analyse the vast amounts of data generated by spatial transcriptomics experiments. One of the 
newer  packages is SOMDE24. Built in python, SOMDE aims to identify SVGs in large -scale 
datasets24. By using a self -organising map (SOM) neural network and a Gaussian process to 
model the data it can identify SVGs in large datasets much faster than SpatialDE, SPARK or 
Trendsceek24. This is achieved as the data is organised into different nodes by the SOM neural 
network, the location and expression data on the node level is used through the Gaussian 
process to identify the SVGs present in the data24. The organisation of data into nodes 
minimises the sample space while preserving the original spatial organisation and expression 
data24. The next stage which uses a Gaussian process identifies the SVGs from the reduced 
sample space24. As seen in packages such as SpatialDE and BOOST -GP, Gaussian process are 
a popular method for identifying SVGs20,21.  SOMDE also uses a log ratio test like that    
 
  9 
 employed by SpatialDE to test the statistical significance of the spatial expression variability 
of each gene7. When SOMDE was applied to discover the SVGs of five different data sets it 
was able to do so without significant increase in computational time as the size of the data set 
increased, yielding results in under 5 minutes for the largest data set with over 20,000 data 
sites24. It also demonstrated a faster running time compared to Giotto and SpatialDE on three 
differently sized data sets used for validation24. Despite this, the package lacks validation  on a 
data set of single cell resolution24. When its performance was compared to scGCO and 
SpatialDE on a simulated data set, SOMDE consistently outperformed scGCO but only had an 
improved performance compared to SpatialDE when a high dropout rate is incorporated into 
the data set24. When its performance was compared to real da ta sets, most of the SVGs 
identified by SOMDE overlap with those identified by packages like scGCO, SPARK and 
SpatialDE24.  
Other methods have been developed to identify SVGs that differ from those presented thus far. 
One of these methods has been implemented in a python package called scGCO which employs 
graph cut algorithms to identify spatial genes25. scGCO first produces a graph by performing a 
Delaunay triangulation in which only true cell n eighbours are connected by edges allowing an 
accurate representation of cellular interactions in a sparse graph which is not memory 
intensive25. Subsequently, Voronoi diagrams are created which have previously been used to 
model cells25. Using a Markov random field (MRF) model and ad apting methods traditionally 
used in object identification in images, scGCO can classify cells into two categories which 
provides efficient, low polynomial time computing and a result which is globally optimal25. 
Much like SpatialDE,  scGCO employs Gaussian Mixture modelling but uses it to classify each 
gene’s expression to ensure more accurate classification of cell types based on their gene 
expression20,25. The performance of SVG was tested against a spatial transcriptomics data set 
obtained from a mouse olfactory bulb and compared to results obtained from the same data by    
 
  10 
 SpatialDE25. A more comprehensive review of scGCO against different packages would be 
beneficial to obtain a holistic understanding of its improved performance in SVG detection. 
scGCO successfully identified over 1,000  additional SVGs compared to SpatialDE, and at an 
FDR cut -off of 0.01 rather than 0.0525. scGCO was able to identify the majority of SVGs also 
picked up by SpatialDE and the SVGs formed clea r clusters each with its own spatial pattern. 
These results were consistent when validation was repeated across replicate mouse olfactory 
bulb data25. However, while scGCO yielded a smaller number of unreproducible SVGs across 
the different replicate data sets than SpatialDE, ~35% of identified SVGs were still 
unreproducible (an 11% reduction from SpatialDE)25. If replicate data sets are available for 
studies, then this is something that should be investigated further across all packages, resulting 
in the exclusion of non -reproducible SVGs for a more accurate final subset of SVGs.  
Addition ally, when comparing between regions of the mouse olfactory bulb scGCO was more 
adept at identifying SVGs than SpatialDE, while neither method entirely recovered all marker 
genes reported in the study which published the data set25. Additional validation was performed 
using data from breast cancer biopsies, with scGCO having a similar improved performed 
compared to SpatialDE when employed on the mouse olfactory bulb data set. Furthermore, the  
SVGs identified by SpatialDE within the breast cancer data set did not maintain consistent 
clustering pattern25. scGCO ’s performance on other spatial transcriptomics data sets was 
equally as robust s25. scGCO also performed better in terms of computational time and memory 
required than SpatialDE and Trendsceek  when used to analyse a simulated data set with up to 
a mill ion cells.  
Identifying Spatially Variable Genes and More 
As evidenced by the packages reviewed so far,  GPs are popular method for analysis spatial 
transcriptomics data as they can model its spatial dependence . To this end, as new packages 
are developed many are built on alternative GP regression models  such as GPcounts26.    
 
  11 
 GPcounts can be used to model either spatial or temporal, large -scale scRNA -Seq data through 
modelling count data using a negative binomial (NB) likelihood26. The NB likelihood model 
should more accurately capture the distribution of gene expression data compared to Gaussian 
likelihood model as it accounts for  possible heteroscedastic noise and the presence of many 
zero-counts  but requires UMI normalisation to be applied26. Furthermore , GPcounts evaluates 
its performance across different simulated data sets when it implements different underlying 
likelihood models to determine under which conditions each yields the best results26. 
Subsequently, it can be observed that employing a NB likelihood was effective in producing 
accurately identified SV Gs in the package BOOST -GP21. However, GPcounts’ s primary aim 
is not to identify SVGs, it is also ab le to identify differential expressed genes, perform 
pseudotime inference and then identify branching genes and discover temporal trajectories, 
widening its scope compared to most packages26. The GP model is stochastic and non -
parametric  and there is a choice of kernel  to find one that most accurately models the data,  
similarly to the step employed by SpatialDE20, and this is determined by the  Bayesian Inference 
Criterion26. Using SpatialDE as a benchmark, GPcounts builds on and alters many of the steps 
implemented by SpatialDE26. This applie s from the testing procedures used to determine SVGs 
and differentially expressed genes p -values to the type of normalisation applied to the data26. 
GPcounts has also implemented the additional step of a built -in check during its kernel func tion 
hyperparameter estimation to minimise the problems of getting stuck in a local optimum by 
restarting the optimisation is this is suspected26. This is s o far one of the only optimisation -
based  method that has implemented this kind of self -check and could give GP -counts a distinct 
advantage in the accurate identification of SVGs.   An improved assessment of GPcounts 
performance  when detecting differentially expressed genes  would be to evaluate the package 
on published data sets in addition to the simulated data26. When evaluated for its identification 
of SVGs, GPcounts did use a real mouse olfactory bul b data set and compared its performance    
 
  12 
 to SpatialD E, SPARK and Trendsceek26. GPcounts identifies the most SVGs out of any of the 
packages , with the vast majority of identified SVGs at a 5% FDR overlapping with those 
identified by SpatialDE and SPARK26. The  unique SVGs identified by GPcounts have spatial 
patterns  that match those depicted in the Allen Brain Atlas, indicating a high confidence in 
these findings26. GPcounts also identified 90% of the biologically important marker genes 
expressed in the dataset, although SPARK had a similar p erformance as it identified 80%26, 
while  SpatialDE identif ied only 30% of the marker genes26.  
Certain frameworks have been developed with a particular S RT technology in mind , in 
combination with addressing an area of data analysis the developers deem lacking. One of these 
is the STUtility workflow created in R and based and built on the Seurat analysis tool27. Aiming 
to develop a package that allows the user to visualise multiple experiments in conjunction to 
create a 3D view of tissue, STUtility builds on well -established methods of analysis (moulded 
by those established for scRNA -Seq analysis) to focus on novel data visualization27. 
Highlighting the im portance of data normalisation and transformation to deconvolute technical 
noise from meaningful biological insight, the package uses a regularized negative binomial 
regression model successfully implemented in Seurat for normalisation27. The imag e 
processing capabilities of STUtility focus on alignment, automatic or manual, of multiple 
samples in addition to the removal of background noise27. The removal of background noise – 
called masking in the study – is an integral part of image proc essing and allows the inside and 
outside of the tissue to be defined as well as decreasing the images’ storage requirements27. To 
automatically align multiple samples the package identifies a reference image then uses an 
iterative closest point (I CP) algorithm to align the remaining samples to the reference, which 
can then be reconstructed into a 3D tissue model27. While this method of creating a 3D model 
is not one which yields the most precise cell segmentation, this trade -off yields gre ater 
computational efficiency and still gives a faithful reconstruction of tissue morphology27.    
 
  13 
 Implementation of a k -means clustering algorithms allows the package to clearly define the 
boundaries of the tissue27. For th e sequencing data, STUtility leans heavily on the functions 
created by the package Seurat27. A decomposition of the normalised gene data called non -
negative matrix factorization (NMF) is used to choose gene drivers and create a low 
dimensional rep resentation of the data to be used in defining clusters and nearest neighbours27. 
To obtain genes whose expression demonstrates spatial patterns a connection network is 
created for each spot which allows the package to calculate the spatial -lag of  each gene across 
spots. This is one of the inputs – the other being the normalised counts – used to calculate 
spatial correlation across the sample27. It’s ability to visualise spatial distinct features is clearly 
demonstrated and determining the spatial relation of gene expression to tissue areas ( e.g., a 
tumour).  STUtility is also able to identify SVGs using neighbourhood networks, but it’s 
accuracy in performing this function is not compared to other packages27. Other capabilities 
were tested on a variety of human and mouse tissues27. For both mouse brain and human breast 
cancer tissue samples spatial gene expression patterns can be  clearly identified27. STUtility 
allows for the manual alignment of multiple images, however a comparison as to the accuracy 
of this method compared to the automatic alignment is not offered and depending on the 
expertise of the user may vary sign ificantly27. Furthermore, while its implementation of 
neighbourhood networks offers a promising method to define subsections within a tissue and 
the heterogeneity within, as would be beneficial during the study of tumours,  to see  how well 
this correlates to the actual tissues heterogeneity of the sample is not reported27,28. 
Assigning Lost Transcripts 
Other packages have been developed with the aims of addressing gaps in analysis that have not 
been adequately acc ounted for; one such package is Sparcle29. When attempting to obtain an 
accurate gene counts matrix from image based spatial transcriptomics techniques, often many 
transcripts are not assigned to cells after segmentation is performed, leading to a loss of data29.    
 
  14 
 Sparcle aims to recapture the data from these ‘dangling’ transcripts29. Developed to be used in 
conjunction with data from any smFISH technology, Sparcle can build a probabilistic model 
which allows assignment of these dangling transcripts to the appropriate neighbouring cells 
using a maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) . The M LE considers  the dangling mRNA’s 
distance to other transcripts, nearby cells and genes ’ covariance  when calculating which nearby 
cell the transcript should most accurately be assigned to29. Similarly to other packages , Sparcle 
assumes that the most accurate representation of gene expression can be modelled using a  
multivariate Gaussian  distribution20,29.  Sparcle can employ two clu stering methods when it 
first groups the cells in the chosen Field of Vision (FOV) by cell type  based on a global count 
matrix : DPMM and Phenograph. Phenograph is an algorithm developed to cluster cell 
phenotypes in hig h-dimensions single cell data and was originally applied to data from acute 
myeloid leukemia30.  Dirichlet Process Mixture Models (DPMM) is a stochastic process which  
can feature all the individual Gaussian distributions for the expression of each gene and allows 
Sparcle to model all these distributions31. While having the additional flexibility to employ 
either of algorithm at the clustering step, du ring its validation Sparcle reports data based on the 
Phenograph algorithm but not on the performance when usi ng DPMM, nor does it specify in 
which instance one method should be favoured over another29.  When used to assign dangling 
transcripts to a MERFISH data set, Sparcle was able to assign 68% or almost 2 million missed 
transcripts, and validation with scRNA -Seq data confirmed that the proportion of cell types 
assigned post used of Sparcle more closely  matched the scRNA -Seq data29. Validation against 
other neuronal data sets returned similarly desirable results . Despite this, ther e are limitations 
to the use of Sparcle. For example, when the programme draws an area around each dangling 
transcript that should mimic the size of a cell, the size of this area is optimised to the size of an 
average neuronal cell, meaning the package mig ht not be well suited to non -neuronal data29. 
Sparcle can run on approximately 80 cells in under 10 minutes with impressive mRNA    
 
  15 
 recovery over three iterations, however additional data on how this would scale with larger 
data sets is lacking, potentially causing computational bottlenecks in bigger data sets29. It 
claims t o improve on packages that remove the cell segmentation step entirely, such as Baysor 
and SSAM, by removing the need for a priori  knowledge of the data set and not assuming that 
the cellular mRNA can be modelled by a uniform distribution29. However, some further 
improvements could be made to enhance the performance such as staining cellular membranes 
to better understand the size of neighbouring cells rather than estimating based on an area 
around the nucleus and  calculated an estimate of the prior distribution of a gene’s localised 
transcript s29.  
Estimation of Cell Type Composition  
Identifying SVGs was the primary focus of the initial packages developed , but it is important 
to note that packages with alternative aims are increasingly being published. For example , 
SpatialDWLS was created to improve the identification of different cell types at locations  in 
the data sets which do not have single -cell resolution32. This is termed ce ll-type 
deconvolution32. Other published packages have been developed for this aim but Sp atialDWLS 
claims to improve  on the results of these packages32. How SpatialDWLS performs  cell-type 
deconvolution can summarised in two steps, the first uses a cell -type enrichment analysis 
method to identify which kinds of cells have a high probability of being at each location and 
the second uses an extension of the dampened weighted leas t squares (DWLS) method to pin -
point the precis e composition of cell types at the specified location32. Firstly, signature genes 
can either be supplied by the user to identified by differential expre ssion analysis32. Building 
on the previously developed  DWLS method for scRNA -Seq data this was extended to spatial 
transcriptomics data by incorporating the signature genes step32. Furthermore, SpatialDWLS 
builds on clustering and gene marker identification used in Giotto32,33. This would imply that 
any shortcoming with Giotto’s performance in these areas would be transferred  to    
 
  16 
 Spati alDWLS.  When evaluated on a simulated spatial transcriptomics dataset,  SpatialDWLS 
outperformed RCTD  and stereoscope in terms of having a lower Root Mean Square Error 
(RMSE)  and in terms of computational time32. However, when its performance was te sted 
against a real mouse brain Visium  data set, SpatialDWLS’s performance was not benchmarked 
against the other three packages thus making its performa nce on real data unclear32. Despite 
this the authors reported that the spatial location of the cell types assigned by SpatialDWLS 
were consistent with those reported in the Allen Mouse Brain Atlas32. An interesting 
application of this package was to identify the change of cell type organisation in a spatial -
temporal context throughout  embryonic heart development32. In addition to quantifying an 
increase in ventricular cardiomyocytes and smooth muscle cells as time went o n, by calculating 
the assortativity coefficient (here used as a measure of whether neighbouring cells were of the 
same type) the study was able to determine that spatial organisation  of the developing heart 
becomes increasingly defined in terms of neighbourhoods of cell types during development32.  
Assigning cell type s to a spatial transcriptomics dataset can be approached more than one way. 
By incorporating a priori knowledge to a probabilistic likelihood function, FICT (FISH 
Iterative Cell Type assignment) can blend expression and spatial information to assign cell type 
to spatial transcriptomics data sets34. This is achieved by creating a generative mixture model 
using  a reduced di mensions representation of expression levels  through a denoising 
autoencoder  and assigning each cell as cell type defined by its neighbourhood  (represented in 
an undirected graph ); the parameters of this model can be learnt by  an expectation  
maximi zation approach which is an iterative process34. Finally, the cell can be classified by 
posterior distribution of the model34. During this process, the problem of over reliance on 
expression data needs to be addressed, which occurs because in a dataset it is likely that there 
are more genes being expressed than cell types present34. To ci rcumvent this problem, a named 
power factor acts as a weight term to balance the dimensionally  reduced expression  component     
 
  17 
 with the spatial component34. The package was validated using thr ee simulated and real data 
sets and compared it to the results of GMM, scanpy, Seurat and smfishHmrf34. Across all three 
simulated data sets, FICT has the highest median accuracy , reaching a high of approximately 
0.89 in one of the simulated data sets34. When evaluated on a real MERFISH mouse 
hypothalamus data set, no ground truth as to the location of different cell types is avail able for 
this data clustering results between parameters learnt for the same models on different animals 
are compared by the Adjusted Rand Index. When comparing acros s this metric, FICT is more 
consistent in applying clusters to the majority of the paired animals, indicating its superior 
performance in assigning cell type clusters34. FICT as has the potential to identify novel 
subclusters within the data set34. However, FICT’s performance drops when applied to data 
sets with smaller numbers of cells, although this is observed  across all packages validated34. 
Furthermore, its decreased performance was still in line with packages with similar functions 
and as spatial transcriptomics data  sets become larger this should not interfere with FICT being 
applied in future16. However, despite its greater accuracy when applied to larger datasets, 
FICT’s runtime in these instances coul d still be improved16. 
RCTD is another package created with the final aim of identifying c ell types in a spatial 
transcriptomics data set35. While identifying SVGs is extremely informative, it is important to 
understand how the role of underlying cell types contribute s to gene’s spatially variable 
expression patterns35. Robust  Cell Type Decomposition (RCTD) makes use of annotated 
scRNA -Seq data to create cell type profiles for ex pected cell populations in the data, then can 
labels spatial transcriptomics pixels with cell types using a supervised learning method35. As 
one of major hurdle in this analysis is the fact that current spatial transcriptomics data sets can 
contain multiple cell types within a single pixel, RCTD can also fit a statistical model to 
determine multiple cell types present within a pixel  and normalise across platform effects 
between the scRNA -Seq and S RT datasets35. To achieve this  RCTD first creates a spatial map    
 
  18 
 of cell types and estimates the number of different cell types in each pixel where the gene 
counts are assumed to have a Poisson distribution35. This should circumvent the problem 
introduced by current  unsupervised learning methods that overlook clustering cells that co -
localise transcriptionally  as well as spatially35. Using this approach  RCTD was able to classify 
cells across platforms with almost 90% accuracy . However, as with any supervised learning 
approach, the cell types one can detect using this tool are limited to how accurately and fully 
the reference data set is annotated, which may present difficulties . Also, while the study tested 
RCTD using references and data sets generated by many different kinds of scRNA -Seq and 
SRT technology, the effects that specific platforms may have on cell -type assignment is still 
undetermin ed. 
Spot-by-Spot Clustering  
A common step in the analysis of many kinds of omics data sets is to perform clustering , and 
this is prevalent when analysing SRT data. This section will discuss techniques that cluster 
spots on a SRT array, that may contain multipl e cell types, based on the overall gene expression 
profile of the spot36. Despite being common, this is not a straightforward step.  Understanding 
the results after different iterations can prove difficult, as does choosing the correct 
hyperparameters36. This is further confounded as each barcode is associated to multiple cells36. 
To address these issues, an R package called SpatialCPie was developed  which focuses on 
clustering spots on the array based on the gene expression profile to allow annotation  of regions 
of the tissue36. SpatialCP ie allows the user to choose which algorithm to implement and clusters 
the data at different resolutions from the start36. The user is then free to choose which 
conformations of clusters created at which resolution most accurately represent  their data. By 
creating a cluster graph and an array plot, SpatialCPie  gives the user varied insight into how 
different resolution affects the clustering outcomes36. The cluster graph relates how the 
different clusters relate to one another across different resolutions, and as new clusters emerge    
 
  19 
 at higher resolutions from which cluster they originate36. The edges of the graph link the 
percentage of spots in new clusters  that descend from different lower resolution clusters36. The 
second visualisation method is the array plot which represents the ST array, but each spot is 
depicted as a pie cart that shows  how similar the gene expression is between cluster centroids 
and spatial regions36. SpatialCPie offers the novel, to the best of the author s’ knowledge, option 
to choose a particular region of the dataset for further sub -clustering which may be appropriate 
depending on the tissue of interest36. While SpatialCPie only compare s itself to ST viewer  - in 
a limited capacity  - its overall performance is promising36. However, additional validation of 
its performance compared to other similar packages such as ST v iewer would be beneficial to 
understand its accuracy.  
Pipelines  
As the area of spatial transcriptomics continues to expand, pipelines rather than just analysis 
packages will become more common place. One of the first available pipeline s written in R is 
Giotto, which is a platform that can be used on both transcriptomics and proteomics data; it is 
divided into a data analysis and visualisation module33. With a focus on being user -friendly 
and reproducib le, Giotto does provide the opportunity for more complex spatial  analysis using 
HMRF models33. As a foundation, Giotto creates a neighbourhood  network of cells and a 
spatial grid for downstream analysis which includes  ligand -receptor identifica tion, gene 
expression pattern analysis and determining preferential cell neighbours33. Giotto is tested on 
ten different data sets obt ained with varying technologies and from varie d tissues to examine 
its performance across a range of benchmarks33. The initial steps in the analysis are similar to 
those performed in scRNA -Seq analysis but Giotto does offer three different algorithms for 
identifyi ng marker genes, one of which  (Gini) was sp ecifically developed for the pipeline , 
which differ in their strength in identifying particular  kinds of marker genes33. The Scran 
method evaluates the markers between two groups of cells by running t -test (default) and then    
 
  20 
 determining marker genes37. Mast identifies markers genes between two cell groups by 
employing a hurdle model38. The Gini algorithms scores markers genes within a cluster based 
on Gini coefficients  which was  developed to identify rare cell types  from an adapted model 
implemented in the social sciences39. All of these algorithms were developed to score markers 
genes between clusters in single cell data sets.  When evaluated, Gini discovered the most 
marker genes overall for the 12 cell types when compared to Mast and Scran , however when 
analysing the sensitivity and specificity for each method when identifying their top 20 markers 
Gini had the lowest sensitiv ity but highest specificity in both the endothelial and 
oligodendrocyte populati ons33. The sensitivity and specificity of each algorithm vary slightly 
across the different cell populations the y investigated  when evaluated against a  sequential 
fluorescence in situ hybridization  (seqFISH+ ) somatosensory corte x dataset and this is 
important when deciding which algorithm to employ, furthermore this needs to be tested 
against data  sets generate d from different biological material and technologies to best 
understand the true limitations of each algorithm33. Giotto also has analysis pipelines designed 
specifically for spatial transcriptomics data sets with lower resolutio n33. By using one of three 
algorith ms to provide an enrichment score between a location’s expression pattern and a cell’s 
gene signature  it is possible to assign a cell type to a location which contains more than one 
cell33.  Once again, the availability of multiple algorithms at this step allows  which require 
different inputs allows Giotto to be flexibly implemented to a number of different datasets33. 
These three enrichment a lgorithms were validated on a simulated dataset similar to one 
generated using seqFISH+ with the hypergeometric algorithms having the lowest AUC score 
(0.8) and both PAGE and RANK scoring similarly well  when predicting cell type at a particular 
location33. When applied to real data sets, the two best scoring algorithms RANK and PAGE 
performed well and should be used when employing the  Giotto  pipeline33. To analyse spatial 
patterns of gene expression, Giotto creates a spatial network to represent the data using a    
 
  21 
 Delaunay triangulation netw ork, which is the same as the method employed by scGCO25,33. 
While the option is available to alternative ly construct a spatial network with two different  
methods of fering the user greater control on downstream parameters, the analysis results appear 
insensitive to these adjustments33. To uncover SVGs Giotto introduces two new methods, 
BinSpect -kmeans and BinSpect rank, as well as incorporated methods from SpatialDE, 
Trendsceek and SPARK33. When evaluated, each of the methods identified unique SVGs, with 
103 genes being identified by all five methods33. 
As the field of SRT continues to expand so will the analytical tools available. As an increasing 
number of down -stream analysis packages are published for SVG identification amongst other 
analysis, pipeline and frameworks will become increasingly complex in the scope of their 
abilities. A new framework developed to combine and encompass al l aspects of analysis for 
spatial -omics technology is Squidpy28. While not built specifically for the analysis of spatial 
transcriptomics data the Squidpy framework developed in Python brings common tools for 
analysis and visualisation to any spatial -omics data and takes advantage of the additional 
information available to improve exploration28. Offering a broader and more modular approach 
than Giotto, Squidpy offers the opportunity for other packages to be easily integrated into its 
pre-existing framework to expand its capabilities28. Squidpy will store the image data  in an 
Image Container  and create a neighbourhood graph of spatial coordinates so that it can be used 
on a wide array of technologies28. A feature of Squidpy that add s additional analytical 
opportunity is its in -built image analysis tools28. While the packages discussed so far require 
an image as part of the input for analysis, none extend so far as to allow the user to investigate 
the d ata contained in this  image to the same extent as Squidpy , which is the capability that 
differentiates it most from Giotto28. The first step in the investigation of cellular 
neighbourhoods and spatial patterns is the construction of a spatial graph28. When compared to 
similar processes in Giotto, Squidpy had a more efficient run time when constructing both a    
 
  22 
 spatial graph and calcula ting neighbourhood enrichment, although for data sets with a smaller 
number of observations the difference was not great28. Despite offering an interesting 
perspective on the direction of spatial -omics analysis frameworks and pipeline and reporting 
limited but promising results with regards to its ability to reproduc e results about cellular 
neighbourhoods, Squidpy does not rep ort its performance in accurately discovering SVGs  nor 
does it quantify how its results relate to those reported in previous studies28.  
Discussion  
Despite being a relatively novel  technology , SRT – often alongside scRNA -Seq or other 
techniques – has already been successfully applied to identify gene expression changes in a 
variety of tissues and disease states. One example was its application in mouse brains to 
understand spatially differential ly expressed  gene involved in early stage Alzheimer’s  
disease40. Different S RT methods are best suited to studying different cell types within a tissue 
to distinguish diffe rences between them in disease states, such as  comparing the dopamine 
neurons from two regions  in Parkinson’s patients41. To further demonstrate how this 
technology can be applied to an array of conditions and disease , Modlin and colleagues 
successfully actioned it as part of an investigation  into the organisation  of cellular subtypes that 
contribute to the antimicrobial capabilities of human leprosy granulomas42.  
This clear increase in the popularity of S RT has prompted the recent development of many 
different packages and pipelines  for the downstream data analysis of S RT data sets. While it 
seems that certain  studies are still reliant on packages developed for scRNA -Seq data adapted 
to included S RT analysis such a Seurat43, the variety of  purpose -built available tools will likely 
replace these . A package for easily identifying SVGs  seems to be the most popular aim , and 
even the pipelines developed so far have  centred around this same purpose20–25,28,33. However,    
 
  23 
 the scope of developing packages continues to expand to further improve the capabilities of 
analysis , such as Sparcle, which was developed to be used in conjunction with other packages .  
Of all the packages discussed SpatialDE  seems to be the most popular,  followed by SPARK, 
Trendsceek and Giotto in terms of being used as benchmarks by which to validate new 
packages. SpatialDE  indicated a tendency to label genes  with very low expression as SVGs22 
and certain discrepancies in performance compared to other packages tested on real data sets. 
This alongside t he potential introduction of false positives indicates an area of improvement 
for this popular package . A current limitation of the validation of  package performance is that 
most commonly two data sets13, obtained using the same Visium method, are use d which will 
surely introduce inherent bias to the benchmarking process . It would be beneficial to 
understand the package’s performance across datasets from different tissues (instead of 
exclusively olfactory  bulb and breast) generated using a different technology.  
To most comprehensively establish the relative performance of all packages, a review should 
be conducted which benchmarks all packages simultaneously  against the same datasets, 
generated by different SRT methods in different tissues  and a standard method for validated 
established . More packages that are modular and can be integrated alongside one another to 
expand the scope of analysis are critical  and will help advance the field and uptake o f this 
technology. Additionally , the further development of user -friendly pipelines will also make 
analysing S RT results more accessible.  As the array of available tools for analysis of SRT data 
becomes greater, the results from studies employing the technology will improve and the scope 
of biological problems that can be addressed will simultaneously expand.  
Declarations  
Consent for publication : All authors provide their consent for publication.  
Competing interest: The authors declare no competing financial interest.     
 
  24 
 Authors’ contributions:  NC drafted the manuscript with intellectual input contributions from 
HTN and MR. HTN and MR reviewed  the manuscript. All authors approved the final 
manuscript.  
Figures  
Box 1:  
One key aim of analysing RNA -Seq and scRNA -Seq datasets is to identify differentially 
expressed genes (DEGs) between two groups  from within a group of highly variable genes 
(HVGs) . DEGs are identified between two groups when a gene’s expression is statistically 
significantly different between the two groups is present1. While this approach has yielded 
many important findings, this approach removes organisational context from the groups in 
question, something that can be recovered using spatial transcriptomics12. This new technology 
has shifted the goal posts for transcriptomics analysis resulting in a sleuth of programmes 
dedicated to disco vering spatially variable genes (SVGs )20–25. As the name suggests, these 
genes will have amplified expression in certain regions of the tissue or sample, often displaying 
an underlying pattern20,44. Determining  the best method to achieve the most biologically 
accurate results and computational efficiency is challenging and research in this area  is 
ongoing.  
 
Figure 1  : Number of papers when a search was performed using  the key words ‘Spatial 
Transcriptomics’ using the software ‘Publish or Perish’45 to search PubMed and manually 
searching bioRvix with the additional parameter of papers published from 01/01/2016 -
16/04/2021 . Papers identified by searching both databases  were consolidated, note that this is 
not a comprehensive view of all papers published on the topic since 2016.  Bars in light blue 
with a dotted outline indicate that not all papers for the calendar year have been included.     
 
  25 
  050100150200250300
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021Number of Ppaers Published
Year   
 
  26 
 Table 1: Comparison of computational packages for analysis of spatial transcriptomics data sets  
Purpose   Package 
Name  Main 
Method  Implem
entatio
n Pros Cons  GitHub  
Identifying 
SVGs  SpatialDE  GP 
Regression  Python  Currently most popular 
package in this category  Labels genes as SVGs that have very low 
expression & two normalisation steps  https://github.co
m/Teichlab/Spatia
lDE 
SPARK  Generalised 
Linear Spatial 
Model  R Does not require data to be 
normalised and controls for 
type I error  Accuracy not significant improvement on 
SpatialDE  https://github.co
m/xzhoulab/SPAR
K 
Trendsceek  Marked 
Point Process  R Low false positives reported  Identifies very low number of SVGs & 
ineffective on larger data sets.  https://github.co
m/edsgard/trends
ceek  
BOOST -GP Bayesian 
Hierarchical 
Model  R Accuracy rate is better than 
other packages in data sets 
with many 0 counts  Accuracy rate still low in presence of many 0 
counts  https://github.co
m/Minzhe/BOOST
-GP 
SOMDE  SOM  Python  Able to efficiently identify 
SVGs even in very large data 
sets In low dropout rate datasets not as good as 
SpatialDE.  https://github.co
m/WhirlFirst/som
de 
scGCO  Graph Cut 
Algorithm  Python  Results were more 
reproducible than SpatialDE.  
Can be used on data sets with 
millions of cells  ~35% of labelled SVGs were not reproducible  https://github.co
m/WangPeng -
Lab/scGCO  
Identifying 
SVGs + 
other 
capabilities  GP counts  GP 
Regression  Python  Can determine temporal 
trajectories and  perform 
pseudotime analysis.  Efficiency on larger data sets unclear  https://github.co
m/ManchesterBioi
nference/GPcount
s 
STUtility  Spatial 
Autocorrelati
on R Image processing and the 
ability to create a 3D model 
from multiple samples.  Accuracy in identifying SVGs and defining 
tissue heterogeneity not comprehensively 
reviewed.  https://github.co
m/jbergenstrahle/
STUtility     
 
  27 
 Assigning 
lost 
transcripts  Sparcle  MLE  Python  Unique capability and can be 
used alongside other 
packages.  Developed specifically for smFISH  https://github.co
m/sandhya212/Sp
arcle_for_spot_re
assignments  
Cell type 
identificati
on SpatialDWL
S DWLS  R  A priori  knowledge can be 
incorporated  Performance was not validated to other 
packages on real datasets  https://github.co
m/rdong08/spatia
lDWLS_dataset  
FICT  Generative 
Mixture 
Model  Python  Addresses problem of over -
reliance on expression data  Performance drops on data sets with less cells  https://github.co
m/haotianteng/FI
CT 
RCTD  Supervised 
Learning  R  Can normalise across platform 
effects of scRNA -Seq and S RT 
data sets  Requires well annotated scRNA -Seq data sets  https://github.co
m/dmcable/RCTD  
Spot -to-
Spot 
Clustering  SpatialCPie  Different 
Clustering 
Algorithms  R  Can perform clustering at 
different resolutions  for 
different subtypes of tissue, 
cluster graph is novel method 
of visuali sing cluster origin in 
ST Validation against other packages lacking  https://github.co
m/jbergenstrahle/
SpatialCPie  
Pipeline  Giotto  - R  Choice of algorithm for 
identifying marker genes in cell 
types, dedicated pipelines for 
lower resolution S RT data  Validation against different biological tissues 
collected on different  platforms lacking.  https://github.co
m/RubD/Giotto  
Squidpy  - Python  Modular so can incorporate 
other packages in analysis.  Cellular neighbourhoods not very 
reproducible.  https://github.co
m/theislab/squidp
y 
 
     
 
  28 
 Bibliography:  
1. Exelby, K. et al.  Precision of Tissue Patterning is Controlled by Dynamical Properties 
of Gene Regulatory Networks. Development  148, dev.197566 (2021).  
2. Hwang, B., Lee, J. H. & Bang, D. Single -cell RNA sequ encing technologies and 
bioinformatics pipelines. Experimental and Molecular Medicine  vol. 50 96 (2018).  
3. Chen, G., Ning, B. & Shi, T. Single -cell RNA -seq technologies and related 
computational data analysis. Frontiers in Genetics  vol. 10 (2019).  
4. Kara ayvaz, M. et al.  Unravelling subclonal heterogeneity and aggressive disease states 
in TNBC through single -cell RNA -seq. Nat. Commun.  9, (2018).  
5. Regev, A. et al.  The human cell atlas. Elife 6, (2017).  
6. Dong, J. et al.  Single -cell RNA -seq analysis unvei ls a prevalent epithelial/mesenchymal 
hybrid state during mouse organogenesis. Genome Biol.  19, 31 (2018).  
7. He, S. et al.  Single -cell transcriptome profiling of an adult human cell atlas of 15 major 
organs. Genome Biol.  21, 294 (2020).  
8. Ximerakis, M. et al.  Single -cell transcriptomic profiling of the aging mouse brain. Nat. 
Neurosci.  22, 1696 –1708 (2019).  
9. Tiklová, K. et al. Single -cell RNA sequencing reveals midbrain dopamine neuron 
diversity emerging during mouse brain development. Nat. Commun.  10, 1–12 (2019).  
10. Zhou, S. et al.  Single -cell RNA -seq dissects the intratumoral heterogeneity of triple -
negative breast cancer based on gene regulatory networks. Mol. Ther. - Nucleic Acids  
23, 682 –690 (2021).  
11. Chen, G., Ning, B. & Shi, T. Single -cell RNA -seq technologies and related    
 
  29 
 computational data analysis. Frontiers in Genetics  vol. 10 317 (2019).  
12. Marx, V. Method of the Year: spatially resolved transcriptomics. Nat. Methods  18, 9–
14 (2021).  
13. Ståhl, P. L. et al.  Visualization and analysis of gene expression in tissue sections  by 
spatial transcriptomics. Science  vol. 353 78 –82 (2016).  
14. Lein, E., Borm, L. E. & Linnarsson, S. The promise of spatial transcriptomics for 
neuroscience in the era of molecular cell typing. Science  vol. 358 64 –69 (2017).  
15. Shah, S., Lubeck, E., Zho u, W. & Cai, L. In Situ Transcription Profiling of Single Cells 
Reveals Spatial Organization of Cells in the Mouse Hippocampus. Neuron  92, 342 –357 
(2016).  
16. Moncada, R. et al.  Integrating microarray -based spatial transcriptomics and single -cell 
RNA -seq r eveals tissue architecture in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas. Nat. 
Biotechnol.  38, 333 –342 (2020).  
17. Crosetto, N., Bienko, M. & Van Oudenaarden, A. Spatially resolved transcriptomics and 
beyond. Nature Reviews Genetics  vol. 16 57 –66 (2015).  
18. Asp, M., Bergenstråhle, J. & Lundeberg, J. Spatially Resolved Transcriptomes —Next 
Generation Tools for Tissue Exploration. BioEssays  42, 1900221 (2020).  
19. Waylen, L. N., Nim, H. T., Martelotto, L. G. & Ramialison, M. From whole -mount to 
single -cell spati al assessment of gene expression in 3D. Communications Biology  vol. 3 
(2020).  
20. Svensson, V., Teichmann, S. A. & Stegle, O. SpatialDE: Identification of spatially 
variable genes. Nat. Methods  15, (2018).     
 
  30 
 21. Li, Q., Zhang, M., Xie, Y. & Xiao, G. Bayesian  modeling of spatial molecular profiling 
data via Gaussian process. biorXiv  (2020).  
22. Sun, S., Zhu, J. & Zhou, X. Statistical Analysis of Spatial Expression Pattern for 
Spatially Resolved Transcriptomic Studies. bioRxiv  (2019) doi:10.1101/810903.  
23. Edsgärd, D., Johnsson, P. & Sandberg, R. Identification of spatial expression trends in 
single -cell gene expression data. Nat. Methods  15, (2018).  
24. Hao, M., Hua, K. & Zhang, X. SOMDE: A scalable method for identifying spatially 
variable genes with self -organizing map. bioRxiv  (2021) 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.10.419549.  
25. Zhang, K., Feng, W. & Wang, P. Identification of spatially variable genes with graph 
cuts. bioRxiv  491472 (2018) doi:10.1101/491472.  
26. BinTayyash, N. et al.  Non-parametric mod elling of temporal and spatial counts data 
from RNA -seq experiments. bioRxiv  2020.07.29.227207 (2020) 
doi:10.1101/2020.07.29.227207.  
27. Bergenstråhle, J., Larsson, L. & Lundeberg, J. Seamless integration of image and 
molecular analysis for spatial transcr iptomics workflows. BMC Genomics  21, 482 
(2020).  
28. Palla, G. et al.  Squidpy: a scalable framework for spatial single cell 2 analysis. bioRxiv  
2021.02.19.431994 (2021) doi:10.1101/2021.02.19.431994.  
29. Prabhakaran, S., Nawy, T. & Pe’er’, D. Sparcle: assi gning transcripts to cells in 
multiplexed images 1. bioRxiv  2021.02.13.431099 (2021) 
doi:10.1101/2021.02.13.431099.  
30. Levine, J. H. et al.  Data -Driven Phenotypic Dissection of AML Reveals Progenitor -like    
 
  31 
 Cells that Correlate with Prognosis. Cell 162, 184 –197 (2015).  
31. Neal, R. M. Markov Chain Sampling Methods for Dirichlet Process Mixture Models . 
Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics  vol. 9 
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. (2000).  
32. Dong, R. & Yuan, G. -C. SpatialDWLS: accurate deconvolution of spatial transcriptomic 
data. bioRxiv  2021.02.02.429429 (2021) doi:10.1101/2021.02.02.429429.  
33. Dries, R. et al.  Giotto, a pipeline for integrative analysis and visualization of single -cell 
spatial transcriptomic data. bioRxiv  (2019) doi:10.1101/701680.  
34. Teng, H., Yuan, Y. & Bar -Joseph, Z. Cell Type Assignments for Spatial Transcriptomics 
Data. bioRxiv  2021.02.25.432887 (2021) doi:10.1101/2021.02.25.432887.  
35. Cable, D. M. et al.  Robust deco mposition of cell type mixtures in spatial transcriptomics. 
bioRxiv  2020.05.07.082750 (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.05.07.082750.  
36. Bergenstråhle, J., Bergenstråhle, L. & Lundeberg, J. SpatialCPie: An R/Bioconductor 
package for spatial transcriptomics cluster evaluation. BMC Bioinformatics  21, 161 
(2020).  
37. Lun, A. T. L., McCarthy, D. J. & Marioni, J. C. A step -by-step workflow for l ow-level 
analysis of single -cell RNA -seq data with Bioconductor. F1000Research  5, (2016).  
38. Finak, G. et al.  MAST: A flexible statistical framework for assessing transcriptional 
changes and characterizing heterogeneity in single -cell RNA sequencing data.  Genome 
Biol.  16, 278 (2015).  
39. Jiang, L., Chen, H., Pinello, L. & Yuan, G. C. GiniClust: Detecting rare cell types from 
single -cell gene expression data with Gini index. Genome Biol.  17, 144 (2016).     
 
  32 
 40. Navarro, J. F. et al.  Spatial Transcriptomics Reve als Genes Associated with 
Dysregulated Mitochondrial Functions and Stress Signaling in Alzheimer Disease. 
iScience  23, (2020).  
41. Aguila, J. et al.  Spatial transcriptomics identifies novel markers of vulnerable and 
resistant midbrain dopamine neurons. bioRxiv (2018) doi:10.1101/334417.  
42. Ma, F. et al.  Single Cell and Spatial Transcriptomics Defines the Cellular Architecture 
of the Antimicrobial Response Network in Human Leprosy Granulomas. bioRxiv  
2020.12.01.406819 (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.12.01.406819.  
43. Ortiz, C. et al.  Molecular Atlas of the Adult Mouse Brain. bioRxiv  (2019) 
doi:10.1101/784181.  
44. Hu, J. et al.  Integrating gene expression, spatial location and histology to identify spatial 
1 domains and spatially variable genes by graph convolutiona l network 2 3. bioRxiv  
2020.11.30.405118 (2020) doi:10.21203/RS.3.RS -119776/V1.  
45. Harzing, A. -W. Publish or perish? Harzing.com  https://harzing.com/resources/publish -
or-perish/os -x (2016).  Access date: 26/04/2021.     
 
  33 
  