Title: Deriving Latent Social Impulses to Determine Longevous Videos
Abstract:   Online video websites receive huge amount of videos daily from users all
around the world. How to provide valuable recommendations to viewers is an
important task for both video websites and related third parties, such as
search engines. Previous work conducted numerous analysis on the view counts of
videos, which measure a video's value in terms of popularity. However, the
long-lasting value of an online video, namely longevity, is hidden behind the
history that a video accumulates its "popularity" through time. Generally
speaking, a longevous video tends to constantly draw society's attention. With
focus on one of the leading video websites, Youtube, this paper proposes a
scoring mechanism quantifying a video's longevity. Evaluating a video's
longevity can not only improve a video recommender system, but also help us to
discover videos having greater advertising value, as well as adjust a video
website's strategy of storing videos to shorten its responding time. In order
to accurately quantify longevity, we introduce the concept of latent social
impulses and how to use them measure a video's longevity. In order to derive
latent social impulses, we view the video website as a digital signal filter
and formulate the task as a convex minimization problem. The proposed longevity
computation is based on the derived social impulses. Unfortunately, the
required information to derive social impulses are not always public, which
makes a third party unable to directly evaluate every video's longevity. To
solve this problem, we formulate a semi-supervised learning task by using part
of videos having known longevity scores to predict the unknown longevity
scores. We propose a Gaussian Random Markov model with Loopy Belief Propagation
to solve this problem. The conducted experiments on Youtube demonstrate that
the proposed method significantly improves the prediction results comparing to
baselines.

Full Text: Deriving Latent Social Impulses to Determine Longevous
Videos
Qingbo Hu
University of Illinois at Chicago, USA
qhu5@uic.eduGuan Wang
University of Illinois at Chicago, USA
gwang26@uic.edu
Philip S. Yu
University of Illinois at Chicago, USA
King Abdulaziz University, Saudi Arabia
psyu@uic.edu
ABSTRACT
Online video websites receive huge amount of videos daily from
users all around the world. How to provide valuable recommen-
dations to viewers is an important task for both video websites
and related third parties, such as search engines. Previous work
conducted numerous analysis on the view counts of videos, which
measure a video’s value in terms of popularity. However, the long-
lasting value of an online video, namely longevity , is hidden behind
the history that a video accumulates its "popularity" through time.
Generally speaking, a longevous video tends to constantly draw so-
ciety’s attention. With focus on one of the leading video websites,
Youtube, this paper proposes a scoring mechanism quantifying a
video’s longevity. Evaluating a video’s longevity can not only im-
prove a video recommender system, but also help us to discover
videos having greater advertising value, as well as adjust a video
website’s strategy of storing videos to shorten its responding time.
In order to accurately quantify longevity, we introduce the concept
of latent social impulses and how to use them measure a video’s
longevity. In order to derive latent social impulses, we view the
video website as a digital signal ﬁlter and formulate the task as a
convex minimization problem. The proposed longevity computa-
tion is based on the derived social impulses. Unfortunately, the re-
quired information to derive social impulses are not always public,
which makes a third party unable to directly evaluate every video’s
longevity. To solve this problem, we formulate a semi-supervised
learning task by using part of videos having known longevity scores
to predict the unknown longevity scores. We propose a Gaussian
Random Markov model with Loopy Belief Propagation to solve this
problem. The conducted experiments on Youtube demonstrate that
the proposed method can signiﬁcantly improve the prediction re-
sults comparing to baseline models.
1. INTRODUCTION
Contemporary Internet world has witnessed the rise of numer-
ous online video websites. According to the statistics, one of the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
Copyright 20XX ACM X-XXXXX-XX-X/XX/XX ...$15.00.leading online video websites, Youtube, is visited by over 800 mil-
lion unique users in every month and receives 72 hours of uploaded
videos in every minute1. Such a huge amount of uploaded videos
and visiting users have brought about both opportunities and chal-
lenges. Investors favor a video website with a large number of reg-
istered users and daily visits due to the potential advertising value
behind it. For example, the most viewed video in the world, a Ko-
rean MV called Gangnam Style, is worth over 8 million U.S dollars
in the online advertising deals2. Therefore, on one hand, in order to
attract viewers, video websites must excel in recommending valu-
able videos to its users. On the other hand, they may also solicit
third party like search engines to help make video recommenda-
tions.
With access to a registered user’s proﬁle, log and full information
of uploaded videos, a video website is able to make recommenda-
tions that the user is potentially interested. However, such protected
information is usually missing or incomplete to a third-party rec-
ommender system. For instance, once a search engine has a set
of videos matching to the key words in a user’s query, the limited
information is usually insufﬁcient to make highly valued recom-
mendations. In this case, how to evaluate a video’s value based on
its public information becomes particularly important. A straight-
forward method to measure the value is based on a video’s total
views, i.e. popularity . However, it may be problematic to judge a
video’s value solely based on the times it has been watched, which
will be introduced in the following paragraphs.
1.1 Popularity v.s. Longevity
Previously, researchers have proposed numerous approaches to
evaluate the popularity of online videos by directly using their views.
The concept of popularity usually depends on a video’s views at a
speciﬁc time point [3, 5, 7, 17, 20]. However, another perspective
of a video’s value, which is the long-lasting value, a.k.a. longevity ,
has been hidden behind the view count growth pattern. In recent
years, video sharing websites such as Youtube offer detailed infor-
mation of how a video accumulates its views through time (such as
Figure 1). Such statistical data provides us an opportunity to mea-
sure and evaluate a video’s longevity. Roughly speaking, longevous
videos have view count growth patterns that demonstrate promis-
ing long-term value, i.e. the ability to continuously attract society’s
attention. Therefore, a longevous video tends to have much higher
view count increase in the future comparing to non-longevous ones.
1http://www.youtube.com/t/press_statistics
2http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/technology/2013/01/psys-gangnam-
style-is-an-8-million-blockbuster-hit-on-youtube/arXiv:1312.7036v1  [cs.SI]  26 Dec 2013(a) "Gabrielle Aplin - Please Don’t Say You Love Me"
(b) A repost of "Innocence of Muslims"
Figure 1: Youtube Statistics of Two Videos (Feb. 2013)
Accordingly, evaluating the longevity of videos have three major
beneﬁts: (1) recommending longevous videos to users can improve
a website’s recommender system; (2) longevous videos have higher
advertising value since they are constantly watched; (3) evaluating
the longevity can help adjust a video website’s data storage strategy
to shorten its responding time: longevous videos should be stored
in quickly accessible locations, since they are frequently visited.
Completely ignoring the longevity and only using the popularity to
rank the value of online videos may cause problems. Next, we use
two real online videos on the Youtube to show that.
Figure 13displays the Youtube statistical data of two videos at
the end of February, 2013. Both of videos are published in the
September, 2012 and accumulated around 2 million views. The
ﬁrst video is a song from a Pop singer, Gabrielle Aplin, and the
second video is a repost of a short movie trailer insulting Muslins,
which is speculated to trigger the incident of the assassination of
U.S ambassador in Libya on September 11, 2012. By solely com-
paring the popularity (a.k.a. views), one may have to accept the
fact that these two are roughly similar. However, the difference
between them is actually easy to be discovered for human by just
comparing the shape of curves in Figure 1: view count in Figure
1(a) continuously increases in the entire history, while Figure 1(b)
only increases at the very early stage). In fact, due to such dif-
ference, the future views of the videos are totally different: in the
September, 2013, the ﬁrst video’s views reach more than 6 million,
while the second one is still less than 2 million (see screenshots
in Figure 2). Therefore, without considering longevity, we may
accidentally recommend a popular yet valueless (even malicious)
movie to viewers in the Febuary, 2013. Are we able to develop a
scoring system to rank different view count growth patterns? This
paper exactly fulﬁlls this quest. The proposed longevity calcula-
tion outputs a much higher score for the ﬁrst video than the second
one. In other words, the method judges the ﬁrst video has a greater
long-lasting value than the second one.
1.2 Latent Temporal Bias and Social Impulses
A straightforward deﬁnition of a video’s longevity can be di-
rectly derived from a video’s view count’s history . To eliminate
ambiguity, we refer "view count’s history" to the curve in which
every point’s value is the view count’s difference between two ad-
jacent time points in a video’s statistical data (curves in Figure 1 are
examples of a video’s statistical data). As a result, a naive deﬁni-
3The ﬁgures are extracted in Feburary, 2012, which are the old
version ﬁgures of Youtube statistical data. The marks of "A" and
"B" in the Youtube statistics are the occurrence of related events,
such as the time when it is ﬁrstly referred in a social network. They
are irrelevant to our problems.
(a) "Gabrielle Aplin - Please Don’t Say You Love Me"
(b) A repost of "Innocence of Muslims"
Figure 2: Views of Two Videos (Sep. 2013)
tion of a video’s longevity is the number of points having non-zero
values in the view count’s history, i.e. how many time intervals
in the video’s statistical data have non-zero view count increase.
However, we argue that the deﬁnition based on view count’s his-
tory will be inaccurate because of the existence of latent temporal
bias. Latent temporal bias is caused by the phenomenon that once
a trend in the social media becomes unpopular, its inﬂuence will
gradually decay instead of suddenly vanish [1]. One of the possible
reasons to cause such phenomena is the delay of user’s response
to an event in social networks [18]. Therefore, even though we
may observe continuous view count increase in history, there may
be only a few number of trends stimulating such increase. In this
paper, we name these latent stimulus "trends" as social impulses
and will provide a formal deﬁnition in Section 3. Although social
impulses are latent factors and reasons causing them are not always
observable, some major ones can be explained by related events in
real life. For instance, Figure 3 shows the social impulses derived
by our method for the ﬁrst "Transformers" movie’s trailer on the
Youtube. As we can see, the two major social impulses actually
correspond to related real events: release of sequel movies.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 10000.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.82x 105Social Impulse Strength
TimeJune, 2009
Transformer 2 RleasedJune, 2011
Transformer 3 Rleased
Figure 3: Derived Social Impulses for the First "Transformers"
Movie’s Trailer
We argue that using the history of social impulses to deﬁne longevity
will be more reasonable, since it can more or less correct the la-
tent temporal bias in the view count’s history. Next, we will use a
real-world case to demonstrate the importance of correcting such
bias. Figure 4(a) is the Google Search trend for the keyword "Si-
mon’s Cat", which is an animated cartoon series by Simon Toﬁeld.
Since events related to "Simon’s Cats" are not reported, we use the
Google Search trend to infer the existence of such events. Figure
4(b) are the derived social impulses and the view count’s history of
an episode of "Simon’s Cat", respectively. These three ﬁgures are
all scaled to the same time interval and each time point corresponds
to the data in a 7-day time window. As one can see, Google search
trend has two obvious peaks at point A and B in Figure 4(a). On
the one hand, due to the latent temporal bias, view count increase
decays slowly after one peak arrives and even causes the view atpoint B’ to be the same as point B. It is more reasonable to consider
a large amount of views at B’ are only "side effects" of the event at
point B. On the other hand, the history of derived social impulses
better captures the major events implied by Google Search trend.
0 2 4 6 8 10 1220304050607080
TimeGoogle Search TrendB
A
(a) Google Search Trend of "Simon’s Cat"
0 2 4 6 8 10 122468101214x 106
TimeImpulse Strength
0 2 4 6 8 10 121.41.61.822.22.42.62.8x 107
TimeViews IncreaseAB
AB
B’
(b) Detected Social Impulses v.s. View Count Increase of "Cat Chat
- Simon’s Cat"
Figure 4: Latent Temporal Bias in the view count’s history of
"Simon’s Cat"
How to discover social impulses becomes one of the major chal-
lenges we need to deal with. In the proposed model, we view the
Youtube website as a digital signal ﬁlter, where the social impulses
are input signals and the view count’s history is the output. More-
over, we deﬁne the system’s impulse response function has an ex-
ponential form, which means that an input signal imposed on the
system will have an exponentially decay effect on the outputs. Such
deﬁnition is based on computational models describing user’s be-
havior when respond to an event [9,18]. In this way, we are able to
formulate the task of discovering social impulses as a convex op-
timization problem and solve it. The proposed longevity scoring
mechanism is based on the derived social impulses.
1.3 Prediction of Longevity.
As stated previously, the longevity can be quantiﬁed based on
the history of social impulses, which is derived by correcting the
latent temporal bias in the view count’s history. However, in our
crawled dataset, we ﬁnd that approximately 35% of the videos do
not have public view count’s histories. The major reason for this is
that many posters have turned off the function of displaying videos’
statistical data. As a result, even though measuring a video’s value
is more important to the success of a third-party recommender sys-
tem (since it usually does not have the viewer’s information), a
third party is still not able to directly evaluate the longevity for
those videos lacking of view count’s history. In fact, this is the
second major problem we need to solve. In this paper, we investi-
gate the possibility of using public information to predict a video’s
longevity, when its view count’s history is missing.
As a good news, we discover that most features of a video, such
as total views, total shares and etc., are usually retrievable. More-
over, the list of a video’s related videos (a.k.a. videos having re-
lated content) is also available. Therefore, we are able to form a
connected network containing each video as a node. The nodes in
the network are linked through edges representing "related videos"
relationship. Moreover, since the longevity score of some nodesare known (their view count’s histories are observable), these nodes
can serve as labeled data. Thus, we formulate the problem of pre-
dicting a video’s longevity score as a semi-supervised learning task
in a network. Based on the problem formulation, we bring about
two baseline methods that one can easily come up with. Further-
more, we also propose a Gaussian Markov Random Field (GMRF)
model with Loopy Belief Propagation (LBP) to solve this semi-
supervised problem. We conduct extensive experiments on a gen-
eral video network, which is mixed with videos from different cat-
egories, as well as categorized video networks, which only contain
videos in the same category. The results show that the proposed
GMRF model with LBP can signiﬁcantly outperform the baselines
in terms of the Mean Squared Error (MSE).
We sum up our main contributions as follows:
To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst ones to point
out the importance and beneﬁts of evaluating a video’s long-
lasting value, namely longevity.
Because of the latent temporal bias, instead of directly quan-
tifying longevity based on the view count’s history, we argue
that it is better to be based on the history of latent social im-
pulses. By viewing an online video website as a digital signal
ﬁlter, we formulate the problem of deriving latent social im-
pulses as a convex minimization problem and solve it.
We propose a simple yet useful longevity scoring mechanism
based on the derived social impulses. Furthermore, we con-
duct statistical analysis and case study on a real-world dataset
to support the rational and analyze the property of the pro-
posed method to compute longevity scores.
To address the problem of assessing a video’s longevity when
its view count’s history is not observable to third parties, we
formulate a semi-supervised task to predict longevity. We
propose a solution by using a Gaussian Markov Random ﬁeld
model with Loopy Belief Propagation. The experimental
evaluation on the real-world dataset conﬁrms the proposed
model is signiﬁcantly better than compared baselines.
The remaining paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we
introduce the techniques we used to collect data from Youtube and
basic statistics of the crawled dataset. In Section 3, we propose
some basic deﬁnitions and the approach to derive social impulses.
Then, we introduce the method to measure a video’s longevity. In
Section 4, we formulate the semi-supervised learning task of pre-
dicting a video’s longevity score and introduce the proposed Gaus-
sian Markov Random Field model with Loopy Belief Propagation.
Experimental evaluation of the proposed model is also in this sec-
tion. In Section 5, related work will be introduced. Finally, Section
6 will conclude this paper.
2. DATASET DESCRIPTION
In this section, we introduce how we collect our dataset from
Youtube and basic statistics of the crawled dataset. In order to de-
rive social impulses to quantify the longevity of a video and further
formulate the prediction tasks, we need two types of data. The
ﬁrst one is a video’s public features that displayed in the Youtube
website, such as accumulated view count, favorite count, etc. The
second type is the view count’s history. This is used to calculate the
longevity score of the video. The ﬁnal obtained dataset contains a
subset of popular (in terms of accumulated view count) videos that
are published in 2010.2.1 Collecting Public Features
We use Youtube API 2.04to directly collect this part of data.
We design the crawling process to target videos categorically5. For
each category, starting from some most viewed videos that are pub-
lished in 2010, we initiate a BFS through the "related videos" rela-
tionship to collect more videos published in the same category and
same year. The search stops until the size of the category reaches
a predeﬁned threshold (100,000 in our experiment). After that, we
remove unpopular videos, whose accumulate view counts are less
than a threshold (30,000 in our case), as well as those videos which
do not have public view count’s history. We run this process re-
peatedly by changing the targeting category. As a result, we obtain
videos in six different categories: Animals, Music, News, Non-
proﬁt, Sports andTechnology , with total number of 65,016 videos
and 117,370 edges6(related video relationship) connecting them.
Table 1 elaborates all the public features we have gathered in this
step, and Table 2 lists some basic statistics of the crawled dataset.
Since sports and music stars often attract more viewers, it is not
surprising to see that the dataset is biased towards "Sports" and
"Music" videos, while "Animals" and "Nonproﬁt" videos are much
less. The huge difference (more than ten times) between the av-
erage value of "likes" count and "dislikes" count indicates that the
viewers tends to give more positive opinions than negative ones.
This is probably caused by that a viewer does not want to offend
(mark "dislikes") a video poster unless him/herself is seriously of-
fended. The average length of a video in our dataset is less than 5
minutes, which is consistent with the statistics in [3, 5].
Feature Meaning
id Youtube ID of the video
category category label of the video
viewCount accumulated views of the video
favoriteCount # of users added the video in the favorite lists
averageRating the average rating (1 to 5) received from viewers
length the length of the video (in seconds)
"like" count # of "Like"s clicked by viewers
"dislike" count # of "Dislike"s clicked by viewers
Table 1: Collected Videos’ Public Features
Total Videos Total Video Edges Connected Components Network Diameter
65,016 117,370 2,365 27
Category Animals Music News Nonproﬁt Sports Tech.
# videos 5,918 15,558 9,674 2,394 20,018 11,454
viewCount favoriteCount averageRating
Avg. value 5000620.81 978.8 4.404
length (seconds) "like" count "dislike" count
Avg. value 266.95 1162.51 95.18
Table 2: Statistics of the Youtube Dataset
2.2 Collecting View Count’s Histories
In order to collect the view count’s history of a video, we apply
the same method introduced in [7]. When Youtube generates the
ﬁgure displaying the view count’s history of a video, it calls a URL
provided by Google charts API7. We analyze the result from the
4https://developers.google.com/youtube/
5The category is an inherent property of videos stored by Youtube.
6The ﬁnal crawled edges are updated to connect videos not only
within the same category, but also across different categories.
7The url for generating the ﬁgure of statistical data has changed in
the current Youtube website. When we crawl the dataset, we are
still able to using the same url address described in [7]same URL for each video and extract all 100 points8from them.
These points are represented as the percentage of the total views.
Therefore, by multiplying the ﬁnal accumulated views to these per-
centage numbers, we are able to observe how view count is ac-
cumulated in history (such as curves in Figure 1). By taking the
difference between the views of two adjacent time points, we ob-
tain the view count’s history, which contains 99 points denoting the
view count increments.
3. SOCIAL IMPULSES AND LONGEVOUS
VIDEOS
As we stated previously, once a social impulse occurs, it may
cause continuous effect on the view count’s history. Therefore, we
deﬁne the longevity of a video based on the history of social im-
pulses, instead of directly using view count’s history. In this sec-
tion, we introduce some basic deﬁnitions, our approach to derive
social impulses and the method to compute longevity. After that,
we use statistical analysis and a case study to demonstrate how the
longevity can offer information of a video’s long-lasting value.
3.1 Social Impulses
3.1.1 Derivation of Latent Social Impulses
To be more clear, we ﬁrst deﬁne some basic concepts. It is natu-
ral to view both social impulses and view count’s history are series
of non-negative digital signal at discrete time steps. Therefore, we
can further treat a video website as a time-invariant digital signal
ﬁlter to model the relationship between social impulses and view
count’s history. Formally, this ﬁlter is named as video signal ﬁlter ,
which has a mathematical deﬁnition according to the basic knowl-
edge in the digital signal processing area:
DEFINITION 3.1 (V IDEO SIGNAL FILTER ).For a given non-
negative vector x=(x0;x1;:::xN), a video signal ﬁlter is a func-
tion of mapping xto another non-negative vector, y=(y0;y1;:::yN),
with the following discrete convolution holds:
yk(k=f0;1;:::;Ng)=kX
i=0xihk i
hi0is the ﬁlter’s Impulse Response Function (IRF), which maps
i0(i0= 0;1;:::n)to a non-negative real number.
Accordingly, social impulses and view count’s history have the
following mathematical deﬁnition, respectively:
DEFINITION 3.2 (S OCIAL IMPULSES ).Social impulses are in-
put signals to a video signal ﬁlter, which is a non-negative vector.
To be consistent with Def. 3.1, we denote them as x=(x0;x1;:::xN).
DEFINITION 3.3 (V IEW COUNT ’SHISTORY ).A view count’s
history is a series of output signals from a video signal ﬁlter, which
is a non-negative vector. To be consistent with Def. 3.1, we denote
it asy=(y0;y1;:::yN).
In order to derive social impulses (inputs) according to view
count’s history (outputs), we ﬁrst need to deﬁne the IRF in Def.
3.1. We use a exponential function with a tunable parameter as
the IRF, since it is reasonable to assume that the effect of a sin-
gle impulse to the system will exponentially decay as time goes by.
Formally, for i2[0;N], we assume hihas the following form:
hi=e i
8The current Youtube statistical data contains more pointsNotation Meaning
x Input signals (social impulses) to a video signal ﬁlter
y Output signals (view count’s history) from a video signal ﬁlter
y* Observed output signals (view count’s history) from the dataset
hi Impulse response function at step i
H Matrix representation of impulse response function
 A tunable parameter in the impulse response function
L() Longevity Functions. L:x!R
vi The feature vector representation of video i
vik kthfeature’s value of video i
wi;j Weight of the edge connecting iandj
si Longevity score of video i
 i() Node potential function of i
 ij() Edge potential function of the edge connecting iandj
mi!j Message sent from itojin the Loopy Belief Propagation
beli Beliefs of the node iin the Loopy Belief Propagation
Table 3: Important Mathematical Notations
whereis a tunable parameter that deﬁnes how quickly the effect
of a single social impulse decays. With a smaller value of , the
effect decays more slowly. As a result, the derived social impulses
are the more signiﬁcant ones, which means the input signals tend to
be sparser. Otherwise, the derived social impulses will be denser.
As a result, we have a series of observed output signals (actual
view count’s history from dataset) and the predeﬁned IRF, while the
input signals (social impulses) are need to be derived. Therefore, if
we denotey=(y
0;y
1;:::y
n)as the observed view count’s history,
deriving social impulses can be formulated as a constrained Least
Square Estimation problem:
minxi:NX
i=0[y
i yi]2
subjectto :8i;xi0
For simplicity, we rewrite the problem in the following matrix form:
min x:ky Hxk2
2
subjectto :x0
His the matrix representing IRF, which is a lower triangular matrix:
hi;j=
e (i j)ij
0i<y
As we can see, since is a constant we predeﬁned, Hwill be a
matrix containing non-negative constants, and the above problem
becomes a standard convex minimization problem. Therefore, we
can employ the method in [11] to efﬁciently obtain a global optima
xfor any given output signal y. Table 3 lists all the important
notations we use in this paper.
3.1.2 Impulse Response Functions with Different 
In this subsection, we analyze how the change of value affects
the derived social impulses. By changing the value of , we can
obtain different IRFs. Such adjustment directly relates to the sig-
niﬁcance of the derived social impulses. As we stated previously,
with a small value, the obtained input signals vector, x, tends to
be sparser. We will use the same example introduced in Figure 4
to show the inﬂuence of the change of value. Figure 5 displays
the derived social impulses of the video in Figure 4 with different
values. It is straightforward to see that with a smaller , derived
social impulses are more isolated (sparser solution of x). More-
over, the strength of them are weaker compare to a larger value.
This is easy to understand: an early impulse have more signiﬁcant
inﬂuence to the future under a smaller , so the effect of later de-
rived social impulses are considered weaker. Furthermore, it is nothard to imagine that the change of will also affect the computed
longevity scores. which will be introduced later.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100024681012141618x 106
Time PointsSocial Impulse Strength
  
 γ=0.3
 γ=0.7
Figure 5: Effect of different 
3.2 Discovering Longevous Videos
3.2.1 Computation of Longevity
Intuitively, longevous videos refer to those videos which can
continuously attract society’s interest. In other words, a longevous
video tends to receive more social impulses than others. In order to
quantify such abstract concept, we introduce a family of functions,
namely Longevity Functions :
DEFINITION 3.4 (L ONGEVITY FUNCTIONS ).Longevity func-
tions is a family of functions that map social impulses to a real num-
ber. Formally, a longevity function is denoted as L(x) :x!R.
The values returned by a longevity function are called Longevity
Scores , which can be used to compare the longevity of different
videos. In this paper, we construct the longevity function by con-
sidering two important factors related to the intuition of longevity.
(i) Longevity refers to the videos which have more active social
impulses. Therefore, instead of incorporating the strength of social
impulses in the longevity function, we should use the occurrence
of social impulses. (ii) Social impulses occur later should be more
valuable, since it implies that even after a long time when a video
is published, it can still attract viewer’s attention. As a result, we
ﬁrst propose rito evaluate the longevity based on xi:
ri=NX
i=0[Ifzjzg(xi)(1 +log(1 +i))] (1)
where Ifzjzg(xi)is an indicator function indicating the occur-
rence of a social impulse at the time i, andis used to ﬁlter out
possible noise. (1+log(1+i))is a weighting term providing larger
values to later social impulses. We use a log function to avoid the
weight dominating ri. Then, in order to simplify the computed
longevity scores, we use a integer scale from 0 to 100 based on ri:
we compute the percentage number of each rito the largest one
and further round the result to the closest integer. Therefore, the
proposed longevity function is written as follows:
L1(x) =Round (ri
maxifrig100) (2)
At last, the proposed longevity function, L1, by Equation (2)
outputs a score from 0 (least long-lasting value) to 100 (greatest
long-lasting value) for each video. In practice, if is allowed to be
changed, we can set = 0. The reason is that by tuning the value of
we can also achieve the goal of ﬁltering out insigniﬁcant social
impulses (noise). Therefore, in the sequel of this article, we set
= 0in the experiments and analysis unless we specify otherwise.0 20 40 60 80 1002468101214
Longevity ScoreAverage View Count Increase 
(log−scaled)Figure 6: (Log-scaled) Average View Count Increase of Videos
with Same Longevity Score ( = 0.3)
3.3 Support and Analysis of L1Function
To support that the proposed longevity function can well capture
a video’s long lasting value, we use the similar method in the ex-
amples demonstrated in Figure 2. First of all, we retrieve the view
counts of all videos in the September, 2013, which is more than
10 months later since we crawled the original dataset. Afterwards,
for videos having the same longevity score, we compute the aver-
age view count increase in this time gap. Therefore, such results
reﬂect how a video’s longevity score computed by L1correlates
to its future view count increase. Figure 6 demonstrates the re-
sults we obtained when =0.3, and the results for other values
are similar. Generally speaking, L1favors videos that can accumu-
late more views in the future, which reﬂects a video’s long lasting
value. Such observation conﬁrms the rational of L1.
In addition, we provide a case study containing two picked videos
whose scores are small (=13) and large (=90), respectively, when
= 0:3. The ﬁrst video is in the Sports category and contains the
playback of a goal in a soccer game. The second video is in the
Music category and contains a live show of Bruno Mars, a famous
American singer. These two videos are speciﬁcally selected as a
case study because their published dates were close and both have
received around 1.9 million views at the time when we collect data.
However, as we can see in Figure 7, the view count increase of the
ﬁrst video ceased at the very early stage and its history of social
impulse contains only a very few spikes. The second video’s view
count, on the other hand, has a more steady growth pattern of view
count and its history of social impulses is more active. The pro-
posed longevity quantiﬁcation method well captures the difference
between these two growth patterns: it outputs a relatively small
score (13) for the ﬁrst video and a larger score (90) for the second
one. In fact, similar to the videos in Figure 1, when we revisit these
two studied videos in the September, 2013, we discover that the ﬁrst
video’s total views are still around 1.9 million, yet the second video
has received around 3 million total views. This again conﬁrms that
L1can effectively measure a video’s long-lasting value.
Next, we demonstrate the longevity score distribution of all videos
in the crawled dataset, and how it is affected by the change of the
value of. Figure 8 shows the distribution under different assign-
ments of. As we can see, the score distribution is roughly a Gaus-
sian distribution, while has a signiﬁcant effect on the mean value
of the calculated longevity scores. Such phenomenon can also be
explained by our previous statements about the effect of changing
value: when is smaller, we assume the system’s response to a
single social impulse decays more slowly, and the calculated social
impulse vectors tend to be sparser. Since the longevous score is
related to the number of social impulses whose strength are greater
than a constant threshold ( ), the mean of the longevity scores nat-
0 20 40 60 80 10000.511.52x 108
Time PointViews(a) Accumulated Views of a non-
Longevous video
0 20 40 60 80 1000510x 107
Time PointSocial Impulse(b) Social Impulse History of a
non-Longevous video
0 20 40 60 80 10000.511.52x 108
Time PointViews
(c) Accumulated Views of a
Longevous video
0 20 40 60 80 1000123x 106
Time PointSocial Impulse(d) Social Impulse History of a
Longevous video
Figure 7: Case Study of Longevous and non-Longevous Videos
(= 0:3)
0 20 40 60 80 1000500100015002000# videos
Longevity Score ( γ=0.1)0 20 40 60 80 100050010001500# videos
Longevity Score ( γ=0.3)
0 20 40 60 80 1000500100015002000# videos
Longevity Score ( γ=0.5)0 20 40 60 80 1000100020003000# videos
Longevity Score ( γ=0.7)
Figure 8: Longevity Score Distribution for Different 
urally decreases along with the decrease of .
At last, as we introduced in the data collection section, we have
organized a video network consisting of videos as nodes and "re-
lated video" relationship as edges. Based on this network, we
further examine the difference between the scores of neighboring
videos: for each edge, we calculate the squared difference of longevity
scores between the two neighbors. Moreover, to complete the com-
parison, we also randomly draw some pairs of videos to calculate
the squared difference, and the number of these pairs is exactly
equal to the number of edges in the network. Figure 9 shows the
average squared difference of longevity scores between the neigh-
boring paris and randomly drawn pairs on the entire video network,
as well as the results of this test on the reduced subnetworks by us-
ing videos in the same category. The results show that the average
squared difference between neighboring videos in the network is
much smaller than the randomly picked ones, especially for some
categories such as News and Nonproﬁt. We can easily understand
such phenomenon by considering the nature of the video network:
two connected videos have similar content and therefore have sim-
ilar long-lasting value. The statistical ﬁndings in Figure 9 suggest
us that video edges in the network are useful to infer unknown
longevity scores from known ones. Such conclusion is crucial to
solve the problem of predicting longevity scores.
4. PREDICTION OF LONGEVITY SCORES
4.1 Task DescriptionAll Animal Music News Nonprofit Sports Tech40060080010001200
  
Neighboring Pairs
Randomly Picked PairsFigure 9: Average Squared Difference Between Videos
In real life, the view count’s history of a video may not be visible
for everyone. As a result, the longevity cannot be directly quanti-
ﬁed. This affects more seriously to third-party recommender sys-
tems, since they have almost zero information of a viewer’s proﬁle
and only public information of videos. In fact, during the period of
collecting videos, we observe that around 65% of checked videos
do not contain any view count’s history. For certain categories, such
as music, this number is even larger. The main reason behind this
phenomenon is that many publishers of videos have turned off the
function of providing public view count’s history. Especially when
the publisher of music videos are commercial companies, most of
them choose not to unveil the history of view counts for their own
interest. However, there are two types of data that are always avail-
able for every video: public features listed in Table 1 and the con-
nection between videos through "related video" relationship.
To sum up, in a real-life scenario, we are able to observe some
videos’ longevity scores (since their view count’s histories are avail-
able), while others are unobservable and need to be predicted. More-
over, we are also able to obtain every video’s public features and a
network connecting different videos. Therefore, we can formulate
the problem of predicting the longevity scores as a semi-supervised
learning problem: a network mixed with labeled (known longevity
scores) and unlabeled nodes (longevity scores need to be inferred).
Afterwards, some interesting questions arise: (1) are we able to pre-
dict a video’s longevity score by only using the public features? (2)
How can we utilize the network of videos to make improvement?
In the following paragraphs, we use the longevity score calcu-
lated when= 0:3as the ground truth. The reason for doing this
is that in Figure 8, we are able to observe a complete Gaussian-like
distribution of the calculated longevity scores under = 0:3and
thus can make a clearer distinguish between longevous and non-
longevous videos. In the following paragraphs, we will ﬁrst in-
troduce baseline models, as well as the proposed Gaussian Markov
Random Field (GMRF) model with Loopy Belief Propagation (LBP)
to solve this semi-supervised learning problem. Afterwards, we
will use experiments on the crawled Youtube dataset to evaluate
the proposed approach comparing to the two baselines.
4.2 Baseline Models
Regression Baseline9A straightforward idea to predict longevity
scores is to use regression on public features and assign videos
to the closest possible scores according to the regression results.
Therefore, except for "id" and "category" in Table 1, we include all
other numerical features into the regression task. To begin with, we
ﬁrst examine the Pearson correlation between each feature and the
longevity score (Table 4). As one can see, all features have positive
correlation with the longevity score yet the correlation is not much
9We tried classiﬁcation algorithms by viewing scores as different
labels. However, the result is generally much worse. For example,
the mean squared error of a decision tree algorithm is more than
50% worse than the linear regression method.Feature Pearson Correlation Coefﬁcient
view count 0.1038
favorite count 0.1116
average rating 0.1034
length 0.0618
"like" count 0.1065
"dislike" count 0.0464
Table 4: Correlation Between Feature and Longevity Score
signiﬁcant, especially for the length of videos and "dislike" count.
Such statistical ﬁnding informs us relying on a single feature, such
as accumulated views, is not able to provide an accurate prediction
of a video’s longevity score. Therefore, we apply linear regression
on all these features to predict more accurate scores. Later experi-
ment will demonstrate the performance of this model.
K-Nearest Neighbor Baseline. Previously, we have used statis-
tical method to demonstrate the difference between neighbor videos
are much smaller than random picked video pairs. Obviously, a
natural method to predict a video’s longevity score is to ﬁnd the k
nearest videos whose longevity scores are observable and use the
mode of these scores as the prediction result. In order to select the
bestk, we search in a range of values for each time we use the
algorithm, and only report the best prediction result in later experi-
ments. This K-Nearest Neighbor style approach and its extensions
are constantly used in semi-supervised learning tasks [16, 21].
4.3 Gaussian Markov Random Field (GMRF)
Model
Motivated by statistical analysis in the section 3, we believe Gaus-
sian Markov Random Field (GMRF) model is a wise choice for
this problem. Therefore, we adopt the framework in [21] with nec-
essary adjustments and extensions to ﬁt our problem setting. First,
for a node (video), say i, in the network, we represent it as an m-
dimensional vector vi= (vi1;vi2:::vim), which stores the value of
each feature and mis the total number of features. In our case, the
node’s features are the same ones used in the linear regression base-
line, which means m= 6. For every edge connecting two nodes, say
viandvj, we assign the following edge weight:
wi;j= exp 
 mX
k=1(vik vjk)2
&2
k
(3)
where&2
kis the variance of the kthfeature. By dividing &2
kin Equa-
tion (3), we are able to scale the effect of different features to the
similar magnitude, since the numerical difference for some fea-
tures, such as view count, are much larger than the others, such as
video’s average rating. Generally speaking, if two adjacent nodes
are more similar to each other with respect to their features, Equa-
tion (3) tends to assign a greater weight to the edge connecting
them. Of course, for any non-connected pairs of nodes, wi;j= 0.
In order to simplify the model, we assume that each node’s longevity
score is drawn from the same distribution. Therefore, if we denote
a node’s longevity score as si(si=f0:::100g), we deﬁne the fol-
lowing Gaussian form of node potential function, which is identical
to every node:
 i(si) = exp 
 1
2(si )2
2
whereand2are constants that can be estimated by ﬁtting the
distribution of longevity scores to Gaussian distribution. Intuitively,
if two nodes connected by an edge with larger weight, we believetheir labels (longevity scores) should be similar. As a result, the
edge potential functions have the following quadratic form:
 ij(si;sj) = exp 
 1
2wi;j(si sj)2
wheresiandsjare the longevity scores of the two connected
nodes. It is easy to see that  i;j(si;sj) = j;i(sj;si), since all
the edges in the network are undirected. Finally, the proposed pair-
wise GMRF is:
p(sj;) =1
ZY
i i(si)Y
i;j ij(si;sj) (4)
whereZis the partition function. As we can see in Equation (4), the
node potential functions serve like prior knowledge about a node’s
label, while the edge potential functions depict the relationship be-
tween two adjacent nodes. Since andare estimated constants
and there is no additional parameter in the GMRF, we only need to
focus on the inference of each unknown video’s longevity score.
4.4 Inference by Loopy Belief Propagation (LBP)
Unlike the baseline model proposed in [21], we are not able to
directly use the close form solution in matrix representation to per-
formance inference on the proposed GMRF. The reason is that sim-
ilar to social networks, video networks are also usually very sparse.
As a consequence, the video network contains isolated nodes with
no edge at all, as well as the connected components that only have
unlabeled nodes. Therefore, these nodes will be singular points in
the matrix form solution proposed in [21]. To overcome this prob-
lem, we adopt Loopy Belief Propagation (LBP) on the GMRF to
infer each unlabeled node’s longevity score.
For each node in every iteration, the LBP algorithm has two
steps: sending message to its neighbors and updating its own be-
liefs. In the ﬁrst step, if the score of a node, say i, is unknown, the
message sent from it to an adjacent node, j, denoted as mi!jis a
vector calculated in the following way:
mi!j(sj) =X
si
 i(si) i;j(si;sj)Y
k2nbrinjmk!i(si)
(5)
wherenbriis the set of neighbors of node i, andnbrinjdenotes
nbridiscardingj. However, if the score of node iis known, the
message sent from it to an adjacent node jis calculated as follows:
mi!j(sj) = i(si) i;j(si;sj)Y
k2nbrinjmk!i(si) (6)
As shown in Equation (5) and (6), the message sent from one node
to one of its neighbors is constructed by discarding the message
received from the neighbor. The difference between Equation (5)
and (6) is that when a node is unlabeled, the message sent from it is
constructed based on the summation of potential functions on its all
possible scores, while the message sent from a labeled node is gen-
erated by ﬁxing its score to the observed true value. This process
makes a labeled node, say i, like a radio station ﬁltering out any
incorrect information (i.e. ignoring mj!i(si)whensiis not the
true score) in the received message and continuously broadcasting
the same type of message directly based on the truth.
In the second step of LBP, for each unknown node i, we update
its beliefs (represented as a vector, beli) as follows:
beli(si) =1
Zi i(si)Y
j2nbrimj!i(si) (7)
whereZiis a normalization factor to ensure the summation of
beli(si)onsi=f0:::100gexactly equals to 1. Of course, if anode’s score is known, we directly ﬁx its beliefs:
beli(si) =
1 (siis equal to the true value )
0otherwise(8)
In each iteration of the LBP, we continuously apply Equation (5)
(8) on every node. The LBP stops until the beliefs of nodes
stabilize or the number of iterations reaches a predeﬁned bound to
control the algorithm’s running time. In our experiments, we set
the bound to be 100, since the diameter of the network is only 27
(Table 2). The ﬁnal predicted score for an unlabeled node iis the
score having the maximum belief, which is argmax si 
beli(si)
.
Algorithm 1 summarizes the proposed GMRF model with LBP.
Algorithm 1 Loopy Belief Propagation on the proposed GMRF
Require:
G= (V;E;W ): A video network. Vis the node set and
V=U[L, whereUis the set of unlabeled nodes and Lis the
set of labeled nodes ( U\V=?).Eis the set of edges. W
stores the weight of each edge.
T: Iteration bound for LBP to control running time.
Ensure:S: {^si|^siis the predicted score of node vi,8vi2U}
1: Initialize all messages mi!j(sj) = 1
2:t=0
3:whilebeliis not stabilized and tTdo
4: foreach nodevi2Vdo
5: ifvi2Uthen
6: use (5) construct messages and (7) to update beli.
7: else
8: use (6) construct message and (8) to update beli.
9: end if
10: end for
11: t++
12:end while
13:S=?
14:foreach nodevi2Udo
15: ^si= argmaxsibeli(si)
16:S=S[f^sig
17:end for
18:returnS
4.5 Experiments
Motivated by different real-world scenarios, we propose two ex-
periments on the crawled Youtube dataset to evaluate the proposed
GMRF and two baseline models.
Prediction on the whole network: this task corresponds to the
situation that we do not specify a particular video category. In this
experiment, we randomly divide the nodes in the network into two
sets. The nodes in the ﬁrst set will be labeled, which means the
longevity scores are known, and the nodes in the second set will
be unlabeled. The tested ratios of the unlabeled nodes to all nodes
are 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4 and 0.5. On the generated networks, we apply
different algorithms to infer the longevity scores of all unlabeled
nodes and record the Mean Squared Error (MSE) of the predicted
scores for each algorithm. In order to be accurate, for each ratio of
unlabeled nodes in network, we repeatedly to generate 50 networks,
and the reported MSE is the average result on the 50 networks.
Prediction on the categorized sub-networks: Sometimes, we
may have a target category of videos in mind. For example, a
search engine should deﬁnitely recommend Sports rather than An-
imals video if the viewer’s key words are all related to sports. In
this experiment, we explore whether it will be easier to predict the
longevity scores in some categories than the others. We reduce thenetwork to 6 sub-networks only containing nodes that belong to the
same category, and the edge set is also reduced accordingly. After-
wards, similar to the prediction on the whole network, based on
every sub-network, we randomly generate 50 networks with dif-
ferent unlabeled node ratios (0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5). Of course,
since the prior knowledge of the longevity scores in different video
categories may vary, when we apply the GMRF model, we need to
change theandin the node potential function accordingly. Sim-
ilar to obtaining andin the whole network, the updated and
can be computed by Gaussian ﬁtting on longevity scores within the
speciﬁc category. The reported MSEs are also the average values.
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5450500550600650700
Proportion of Unlabeled Nodes in the NetworkAverage Mean Sqaured Error  
Linear Regressioin
KNN
GMRF−LBP
Figure 10: Average MSEs of Predicted Scores
For the ﬁrst prediction task on all videos, average MSEs on net-
works having different proportions of unlabeled nodes are reported
in Figure 10. As we can see, the proposed GMRF with LBP sig-
niﬁcantly outperforms the other baselines. Moreover, the perfor-
mance of compared algorithms are all stable despite the change of
the ratio of unlabeled nodes. For linear regression model, such phe-
nomena is easy to explain: since labeled and unlabeled nodes are
randomly divided, we expect the distribution of labeled nodes’ fea-
tures and longevity scores are all persistent despite the change of
labeled ratio. As a result, the trained model may be very alike and
thus have similar prediction power. Similar to the linear regression,
we observe that reducing the proportion of labeled nodes is not go-
ing to affect the performance of network-based methods (KNN and
GMRF) either. This demonstrates that such methods are also ro-
bust in the prediction task. In fact, for a speciﬁc semi-supervised
learning task, such phenomenon is not unique [13].
Similar to the whole network, the results on the categorized sub-
networks, which are reported in Figure 11, also conﬁrm that the
GMRF algorithm is the best one among all three approaches. What
is more, by comparing the results across different sub-networks,
we discover that predicting longevity scores for videos in Animals,
Music and Sports category have lower average mean squared errors
than the others. Another interesting ﬁnding is that although the
KNN algorithm is usually worse than the linear regression, it is
better in some speciﬁc categories, such as News and Nonproﬁt.
5. RELATED WORK
Topics related to the popularity of online videos start to attract
the attention from researchers in recent years. Early articles con-
ducted many statistical analysis on the online videos website such
as Youtube [2–5, 14]. Due to the fact that most of published videos
in Youtube are entirely user generated content, the statistics, there-
fore, demonstrate novel phenomena on major indices that is distin-
guished from the videos in traditional medias. In previous research,
"popularity" is usually a video’s total views [3, 7, 17, 20], which
means it evaluates a video’s value at a certain time point. Moti-
vated by the potential advertising proﬁt, articles such as [3, 17, 20]
attempt to use different methods and feature sets to predict a video’s
popularity, a.k.a number of views, in the future. Unlike popularity
in this paper, longevity evaluates a video’s long-term value based
on its entire history rather than a single point. Moreover, a trend in
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5300400500600
Proportion of Unlabeled Nodes in the NetworkAverage Mean Sqaured Error  
Linear Regressioin
KNN
GMRF−LBP(a) Animals
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5300400500600
Proportion of Unlabeled Nodes in the NetworkAverage Mean Sqaured Error  
Linear Regressioin
KNN
GMRF−LBP (b) Music
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5600700800900
Proportion of Unlabeled Nodes in the NetworkAverage Mean Sqaured Error  
Linear Regressioin
KNN
GMRF−LBP
(c) News
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5500600700800
Proportion of Unlabeled Nodes in the NetworkAverage Mean Sqaured Error  
Linear Regressioin
KNN
GMRF−LBP (d) Nonproﬁt
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5400500600700
Proportion of Unlabeled Nodes in the NetworkAverage Mean Sqaured Error  
Linear Regressioin
KNN
GMRF−LBP
(e) Sports
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5500600700800900
Proportion of Unlabeled Nodes in the NetworkAverage Mean Sqaured Error  
Linear Regressioin
KNN
GMRF−LBP (f) Technology
Figure 11: Average MSEs of Predicted Scores on Categorized
Sub-networks
the society usually causes a decaying effect on a social media sys-
tem. A good example are the Tweets related to one topic trend in
the Twitter network [1] and the disperse of a news event through an
online social network [10]. As a result, similar effect causes that a
single latent trend may stimulate continuous yet decaying increase
of a video’s views. Due to such effect, we believe it is more reason-
able to measure the longevity based on the history of latent trends,
a.k.a social impulses, rather than the history of view count increase.
To derive latent social impulses, we presume that a social im-
pulse has an exponentially tailed effect on a video’s views. In fact,
similar exponential functions are often used to describe an event’s
effect to a online service user. For example, [18] uses this type of
function to model the delay time of a user’s response to a social
trend or event and [9] uses it to model the inﬂuence of a user’s
shared event to his/her friends. Similarly, such exponential inﬂu-
ence is also widely exist in the area of signal processing [8, 19].
Analogously, we view an online video website as a digital signal
ﬁlter with an exponential impulse response function. The system
takes social impulses as input signals and outputs the view count’s
history. However, unlike predicting a system’s outputs with inputs,
which is very common in the signal processing area, we need to
estimate the system’s inputs with known outputs. By using least
squared error estimation, deriving social impulses is formulated as
a convex optimization problem.
In the part of predicting a video’s longevity score, the video’s
network connected by "related videos" relationship is very crucial.
Previously, articles like [6, 12] studied such "social network" of
Youtube videos. Unlike human spontaneously form the link to
each other, videos are connected according to their content. In-
terestingly, researchers found that the video’s network has many
common points with human social networks, such as the "small
world" phenomenon [12]. With the help of the video’s network, we
are able to formulate the prediction problem of a video’s longevity
score as a semi-supervised learning task. Therefore, we are able to
adopt the framework in [21], which uses Gaussian Markov RandomField and harmonic functions. However, unlike the original model
only has edge potential functions, we also add node potentials by
using prior knowledge derived from statistical analysis. Moreover,
the original model deals with a general prediction problem, while
our problem has a speciﬁc setting: the network is very sparse. Be-
cause of this phenomena, the close form solution proposed in [21]
will have many singular points which cannot be estimated. There-
fore, we apply Loopy Belief Propagation algorithm [15] on the pro-
posed model to infer the unknown longevity scores. According to
the experiments, such adjustments make the proposed method bet-
ter ﬁts our problem and yields promising results.
6. CONCLUSION
As a new thriving force in the online world, video sharing web-
sites largely enrich online media and generate huge opportunities
for business. In this paper, we have discussed the beneﬁt of evalu-
ating and scoring the long-lasting value, a.k.a. longevity, for both
third party companies and video websites. A longevous video tends
to keep attracting society’s attention, and thus has higher view count
increase in the future. Based on the crawled data from Youtube, we
discuss the latent temporal bias in a video’s view count’s history,
which is the decaying effect that any event/trend may impose on a
social media system. Through examples of real online videos, we
argue the necessity to correct such bias before we evaluate a video’s
longevity. Social impulses are derived latent factors stimulating the
increase of a video’s view count. The proposed longevity calcula-
tion is based on the history of social impulses, since it can reduce
the inﬂuence of the latent temporal bias and therefore to be more
reasonable. In order to derive social impulses behind a video’s view
count’s history, we view the video website as a digital signal ﬁlter
and formulate this task as a convex optimization problem. As a
result, the history of social impulses can be easily derived and the
longevity thus can be quantiﬁed. However, unfortunately, not ev-
ery online video has a public view count’s history. Therefore, it
becomes a challenge for third parties to evaluate longevity of all
videos with limited public information. In the second part of this
paper, we exploit the possibility to predict a video’s longevity when
the view count’s history is missing. We formulate this problem as
a semi-supervised learning task and use public features of videos,
as well as the network constructed by "related videos" relationship
to solve it. The proposed method is a Gaussian Markov Random
Field model with Loopy Belief Propagation algorithm. At last, the
experiments on the crawled dataset show that the proposed model
signiﬁcantly outperforms other baseline methods.
7. REFERENCES
[1] S. Asur, B. A. Huberman, G. Szabo, and C. Wang. Trends in
social media: Persistence and decay. In ICWSM , 2011.
[2] Z. Avramova, S. Wittevrongel, H. Bruneel, and
D. De Vleeschauwer. Analysis and modeling of video
popularity evolution in various online video content systems:
Power-law versus exponential decay. In First International
Conference on Evolving Internet. , pages 95 –100, 2009.
[3] M. Cha, H. Kwak, P. Rodriguez, Y . Ahn, and S. Moon. I tube,
you tube, everybody tubes: analyzing the world’s largest user
generated content video system. In Proceedings of
Conference on Internet Measurement ’07 , pages 1–14, 2007.
[4] M. Cha, H. Kwak, P. Rodriguez, Y .-Y . Ahn, and S. Moon.
Analyzing the video popularity characteristics of large-scale
user generated content systems. IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Networking , 17(5):1357 –1370, 2009.[5] X. Cheng, C. Dale, and J. Liu. Statistics and social network
of youtube videos. In 16th International Workshop on
Quality of Service , pages 229 –238, 2008.
[6] X. Cheng and J. Liu. Exploring interest correlation for
peer-to-peer socialized video sharing. ACM Trans.
Multimedia Comput. Commun. , 8(1):5:1–5:20, 2012.
[7] F. Figueiredo, F. Benevenuto, and J. M. Almeida. The tube
over time: characterizing popularity growth of youtube
videos. In Proceedings of ACM WSDM ’11 , pages 745–754,
2011.
[8] M. Hayat and B. Saleh. Statistical properties of the impulse
response function of double-carrier multiplication avalanche
photodiodes including the effect of dead space. Lightwave
Technology, Journal of , 10(10):1415–1425, 1992.
[9] T. Iwata, A. Shah, and Z. Ghahramani. Discovering latent
inﬂuence in online social activities shared cascade poisson
processes. In KDD ’13 , 2013.
[10] L. Kong, S. Jiang, R. Yan, S. Xu, and Y . Zhang. Ranking
news events by inﬂuence decay and information fusion for
media and users. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM
international conference on Information and knowledge
management , pages 1849–1853. ACM, 2012.
[11] C. L. Lawson and R. J. Hanson. Solving least squares
problems , volume 161. SIAM, 1974.
[12] H. Li, J. Liu, K. Xu, and S. Wen. Understanding video
propagation in online social networks. In Proceedings of
IEEE IWQoS ’12 , pages 21:1–21:9, 2012.
[13] P. Li, X. Wu, and X. Hu. Mining recurring concept drifts
with limited labeled streaming data. ACM Transactions on
Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST) , 3(2):29, 2012.
[14] S. Mitra, M. Agrawal, A. Yadav, N. Carlsson, D. Eager, and
A. Mahanti. Characterizing web-based video sharing
workloads. ACM Trans. Web , 5(2):8:1–8:27, May 2011.
[15] K. P. Murphy, Y . Weiss, and M. I. Jordan. Loopy belief
propagation for approximate inference: An empirical study.
InProceedings of the Fifteenth conference on Uncertainty in
artiﬁcial intelligence , pages 467–475. Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc., 1999.
[16] K. Ozaki, M. Shimbo, M. Komachi, and Y . Matsumoto.
Using the mutual k-nearest neighbor graphs for
semi-supervised classiﬁcation of natural language data. In
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning , CoNLL ’11, pages 154–162.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2011.
[17] H. Pinto, J. M. Almeida, and M. A. Gonçalves. Using early
view patterns to predict the popularity of youtube videos. In
Proceedings of the 6th ACM international conference on Web
search and data mining , WSDM ’13, pages 365–374, 2013.
[18] K. Saito, M. Kimura, K. Ohara, and H. Motoda. Selecting
information diffusion models over social networks for
behavioral analysis. In Proceedings of the 2010 European
conference on Machine learning and knowledge discovery in
databases: Part III , ECML PKDD’10, pages 180–195, 2010.
[19] E. Smith. Localization in nonuniform media: Exponential
decay of the late-time ginzburg-landau impulse response.
Physical Review B , 58(9):5346, 1998.
[20] G. Szabo and B. A. Huberman. Predicting the popularity of
online content. ACM Commun. , 53(8):80–88, Aug. 2010.
[21] X. Zhu, Z. Ghahramani, J. Lafferty, et al. Semi-supervised
learning using gaussian ﬁelds and harmonic functions. In
ICML , volume 3, pages 912–919, 2003.