Title: Dynamic networks reveal key players in aging
Abstract:   Motivation: Since susceptibility to diseases increases with age, studying
aging gains importance. Analyses of gene expression or sequence data, which
have been indispensable for investigating aging, have been limited to studying
genes and their protein products in isolation, ignoring their connectivities.
However, proteins function by interacting with other proteins, and this is
exactly what biological networks (BNs) model. Thus, analyzing the proteins' BN
topologies could contribute to understanding of aging. Current methods for
analyzing systems-level BNs deal with their static representations, even though
cells are dynamic. For this reason, and because different data types can give
complementary biological insights, we integrate current static BNs with
aging-related gene expression data to construct dynamic, age-specific BNs.
Then, we apply sensitive measures of topology to the dynamic BNs to study
cellular changes with age.
  Results: While global BN topologies do not significantly change with age,
local topologies of a number of genes do. We predict such genes as
aging-related. We demonstrate credibility of our predictions by: 1) observing
significant overlap between our predicted aging-related genes and "ground
truth" aging-related genes; 2) showing that our aging-related predictions group
by functions and diseases that are different than functions and diseases of
genes that are not predicted as aging-related; 3) observing significant overlap
between functions and diseases that are enriched in our aging-related
predictions and those that are enriched in "ground truth" aging-related data;
4) providing evidence that diseases which are enriched in our aging-related
predictions are linked to human aging; and 5) validating all of our
high-scoring novel predictions via manual literature search.

Full Text: arXiv:1307.3388v1  [cs.CE]  12 Jul 2013Pages 1–8
Dynamicnetworks revealkey playersinaging
Faisal,F.E.andMilenkovi ´c,T.∗
Computer Scienceand Engineering, University ofNotreDame , NotreDame,IN46556, USA
ABSTRACT
Motivation: Since susceptibility to diseases increases with age,
studying aging gains importance. Analyses of gene expressi on or
sequence data, which have been indispensable for investiga ting
aging,havebeenlimitedtostudyinggenesandtheirprotein products
in isolation, ignoring their connectivities. However, pro teins function
by interacting with other proteins, and this is exactly what biological
networks (BNs) model. Thus, analyzing the proteins’ BN topo logies
could contribute to understanding of aging. Current method s for
analyzing systems-level BNs deal with their static represe ntations,
even though cells are dynamic. For this reason, and because
different data types can give complementary biological ins ights, we
integrate current static BNs with aging-related gene expre ssion data
to construct dynamic, age-speciﬁc BNs. Then, we apply sensi tive
measures of topology to the dynamic BNs to study cellular cha nges
withage.
Results: WhileglobalBN topologiesdo not signiﬁcantly change with
age,localtopologiesofanumberofgenesdo.Wepredictsuch genes
as aging-related. We demonstrate credibility of our predic tions by:
1) observing signiﬁcant overlap between our predicted agin g-related
genes and “ground truth” aging-related genes; 2) showing th at our
aging-related predictions group by functions and diseases that are
different than functions and diseases of genes that are not p redicted
as aging-related; 3) observing signiﬁcant overlap between functions
and diseases that are enriched in our aging-related predict ions and
those that are enriched in “ground truth” aging-related dat a; 4)
providing evidence that diseases which are enriched in our a ging-
related predictions are linked to human aging; and 5) valida ting all of
ourhigh-scoringnovel predictionsvia manualliterature s earch.
Contact: tmilenko@nd.edu
1 INTRODUCTION
1.1 Motivationand background
Since the US is on average growing older because of ∼78 million
of baby boomers who have began turning 65 in 2011, and since
susceptibility to diseases increases withage, studying hu man aging
gains importance. Analysis of gene expression data has been
indispensable for investigating aging (Wieser et al., 2011; Fortney
et al., 2010). However, it has mostly been limited to studying
differential expression of individual genes, without cons idering
their connectivities (Fortney et al., 2010). But, it is the proteins
(gene products) that carry out cellular processes and they d o
so by interacting with other proteins instead of acting alon e.
And this is exactly what biological networks and protein-protein
interaction (PPI) networks in particular model; in PPI networks,
nodes are proteins and edges correspond to physical interac tions
between the proteins. Thus, analyzing topologies of protei ns in
∗Towhomcorrespondence should be addressedPPI networks could contribute to understanding of the proce sses of
aging. Although as a proof of concept this study focuses on PP I
networks, it is applicable to other types of biological netw orks.
High-throughput screens for PPI detection have yielded sys tems-
level (though incomplete) PPInetworks for manyorganisms, which
are publicly available (Breitkreutz etal.,2008).
The majority of current methods for analyzing systems-leve l PPI
networks deal with their staticrepresentations, due to limitations
of biotechnologies for PPI data collection, even though cel ls are
dynamic (Przytycka and Kim, 2010). For this reason, and beca use
different data types can give complementary biological ins ights
(Memiˇ sevi´ c et al., 2010; Przytycka and Kim, 2010), we integrate
current static PPI network data (Peri et al., 2004; Breitkreutz et al.,
2008) with age-speciﬁc gene expression data (Lu et al., 2004) to
computationally construct dynamic, age-speciﬁc PPI networks , in
order tostudycellular changes withage from such networks.
Furthermore, topological positions of aging-related gene s in the
staticnetworks have been studied (Kriete et al., 2011; Ferrarini
et al., 2005; Reja et al., 2009; Promislow, 2004; de Magalh˜ aes,
2009), but mostly with crudemeasures of topology that can
not cope with the complexity of PPI networks (Prˇ zulj, 2011) .
For example, node degrees have been used to argue the central
role or aging-related proteins in the yeast network compare d to
proteins that are not associated with aging, or to study the r ole
of chaperones (heat stock proteins) in aging (Promislow, 20 04;
S˝ oti and Csermely, 2007). In addition to aging, many approa ches
have aimed to link node degrees with, for example, essential ity
(Jeonget al., 2001), disease (Sharan and Ideker, 2008; Vanunu
et al., 2010), cancer (Jonsson and Bates, 2006; Aragues et al.,
2008), or pathogenicity (Dyer et al., 2008). However, it is possible
that the high-degree proteins have been more studied simply
because of their known relevance to human health (Prˇ zulj, 2 011;
Ratmann et al., 2009). Hence, more constraining measures of
topology might be needed that go beyond capturing only the di rect
network neighborhood of a node (Milenkovi´ c and Prˇ zulj, 20 08;
Milenkovi´ c etal.,2010a). Whilesuchmeasuresexistandhavebeen
used to link proteins’ network positions with their involve ment in
some biological processes (Sharan et al., 2007; Milenkovi´ c et al.,
2011), to our knowledge, they have not been linked to protein s’
involvement in aging even in static and especially in dynami c
PPI networks. Here, we apply a seriesof measures of topology,
including some highly sensitive measures (Milenkovi´ c and Prˇ zulj,
2008; Milenkovi´ c et al., 2011), to the dynamic PPI networks to
identify keyplayers inaging.
1.2 Our study
We aim to study human aging via integration of aging-related
gene expression data with static PPI network data (Fig. 1). W e
obtain dynamic, age-speciﬁc PPInetworks by selectinginth e static
network: 1) all proteins that correspond to actively expres sed genes
1FaisalandMilenkovi ´c
Fig. 1.Summary of our study. We
integrate a static PPI network with
aging-related gene expression data
to obtain age-speciﬁc networks. We
analyze changes in global and local
network topologies with age. While
global network analysis indicates no
age-speciﬁc change, local topologies
(as captured by seven nodecentrality
measures) of some proteins do
signiﬁcantly change with age. We
predict such proteins as aging-
related and validate our predictions
in several ways.
at different ages and 2) all PPIs involving these “active” pr oteins.
Hence, each age-speciﬁc network is the network that is “acti ve”
at a given age. We hypothesize that the dynamic and integrati ve
network analysis provides a valuable model of cellular func tioning
that can reveal aging-related information and that can reve al more
of the informationthan staticanalysis of individual data t ypes.
Given the dynamic network data, we ﬁrst aim to answer whether
the overall network topologies change with age (Fig. 1). Sin ce this
isnotthe case, and since the gene expression data alone revealed
onlyasmallportionofallgenesasaging-related(Lu etal.,2004), it
couldbethat localtopologiesaroundonlya subsetofproteinsinthe
network do change with age. Hence, we study positions of prot eins
in each age-speciﬁc PPI network with respect to measures of l ocal
topology, called node centralities , with the goal of identifying
proteins whose centralities signiﬁcantly change with age. We ﬁnd
515suchproteins(8.1%ofallproteinsinthestaticnetwork ), which
is quantitatively consistent to the result by Lu et al.(2004). We
predictthese proteins as aging-relatedandvalidate them a sfollows.
1)The predictions are statisticallysigniﬁcant, i.e.,non-r andom.
2)The overlap of our predicted aging-related genes and “groun d
truth” aging-related genes is signiﬁcant. All of our ﬁve highest-
scoringpredictions, namely GORASP2, MAP2K4, TIAM1,
MAP1B, and S100B, are present in multipleaging-related “ground
truth”datasets.Nonetheless,manyofourpredictionsare novel,i.e.,
absent from the “ground truth” data. This conﬁrms that dynam ic
network analysis of integrated data types can reveal additi onal
biologicalknowledgecomparedtostaticanalysisofindivi dualdata.
3)Our predictions group by biological functions and diseases that
are different than functions and diseases of genes that we do not
predictasaging-related.Theoverlapbetweenfunctionsan ddiseases
thatareenrichedinourpredictionsandthosethatareenric hedinthe
“ground truth” aging-related data is signiﬁcant. Diseases that are
enriched inour predictions arelinked tohuman aging.
4)Wemanually search in the literature for our top 10% highest-
scoring predictions that are not present inthe “ground trut h” aging-
relateddata, andwe successfully validate all of them.
2 MATERIALSANDMETHODS
2.1 Data
2.1.1 Aging-relatedgeneexpressiondata Weusehumanbraingene
expression data consisting of 30 samples obtained from 30 in dividuals
between 26 and 106 years of age. In an individual, Lu et al.(2004) deﬁneda gene as being expressed (or active) at a given age if its detection p-value,
which indicates the signiﬁcance level of its mRNA abundance atthat age, is
lessthan0.04.Weadopt thesameprocedure (Supplementary Section S1.1).
2.1.2 Static PPI network data We obtain human static PPIs from
HPRD (Peri et al., 2004) and BioGRID (Breitkreutz et al., 2008). HPRD
data consists of 9,322 unique proteins and 36,030 unique PPI s between the
proteins. BioGRID data consists of 10,078 unique proteins ( with respect to
their gene IDs) and 50,954 unique PPIsbetween the proteins.
2.1.3 Integrating static PPI network with gene expression d ata
to form age-speciﬁc PPI networks We form dynamic, age-speciﬁc
networks as follows. To form the network speciﬁc to a given ag e, we
select in the static network those proteins that are express ed at that age
(Section 2.1.1) and all PPIs that exist between the expresse d proteins (see
SupplementarySectionS1.2foraformaldescription). Sinc egeneexpression
data is collected for 30 ages, 30 age-speciﬁc networks can be formed from
the given static network. Since we study two static networks (HPRD and
BioGRID), we obtain two sets of dynamic networks. We run subs equent
analyses on each of the network sets. Since we ﬁnd that result s are similar
across the two sets, for simplicity, here wereport results o nly for the HPRD
network. Results for the BioGRID network are reported in the Supplement.
2.1.4 “Ground truth” aging-related data We denote the set of
genes present in both the static PPI network (Section 2.1.2) and brain gene
expression data (Section 2.1.1)as StatNetExpression .
By studying brain gene expression data from Section 2.1.1, L u
et al.(2004) predicted 442 genes as aging-related, as their expre ssion
signiﬁcantly correlated with age. Of these, 341 genes are pr esent in
StatNetExpression. Henceforth, wedenote this “ground tru th” aging-related
set of 341 genes predicted from brain gene expression data alone as
BrainExpression2004Age .
By studying another brain gene expression data with 174 samp les
from 55 individuals, with multiple sample per individual, B erchtold
et al.(2008) identiﬁed 8,277 genes (via 12,514 probes) whose expr ession
signiﬁcantly changed with age. Of these, 3,228 are present i n
StatNetExpression. Henceforth, wedenote this “ground tru th” aging-related
set of 3,228 genes predicted from brain gene expression data alone as
BrainExpression2008Age .
Clearly,BrainExpression2004Age andBrainExpression200 8Age arevery
similar in the sense that their aging-related genes have bee n inferred from
brain gene expression data. (And as such, among all “ground t ruth” data
sets (see below), these two sets are expected to be the most si milar to
our aging-related predictions, since our predictions are a lso partly based
on brain human gene expression data.) However, it is importa nt to note
thatBrainExpression2004Age andBrainExpression2008Age werepredicted
fromtwo independent data sets,andcompared toBrainExpres sion2004Age,
BrainExpression2008Age is a result of a newer microarray st udy, it covers
2Dynamicnetworksreveal keyplayersinaging
more samples and more individuals, and it covers more sample s per
individual.
By studying brain gene expression data set related to differ ent stages
of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Simpson et al.(2011) identiﬁed 2,911 genes
(linked to 3,404 probes) that have signiﬁcantly different e xpression levels
at different stages of AD. Of these, 1,117 are present in Stat NetExpression.
Henceforth, we denote this “ground truth” AD-related set of 1,117 genes
predicted from brain gene expression data asADExpressionAge .
By studying gene expression data related to Hutchinson-Gil fold progeria
syndrome (HGPS), a human premature aging-related disease, Liuet al.
(2011) identiﬁed 1,731 genes that have a differentially met hylated region
between wild-type and HGPS-affected ﬁbroblasts of vascula r muscles cells.
Of these, 708 are present in StatNetExpression. Henceforth , we denote
this “ground truth” HGPS-related set of 708 genes predicted fromvascular
muscles-related gene expression data asHGPSExpressionAge .
In July 2012, GenAge contained 261 human genes that have been linked
toagingassequence-basedorthologsofaging-related gene sinmodelspecies
(deMagalh˜ aes etal., 2009). Of these, 230 arepresent in StatNetExpression.
Henceforth, we denote this “ground truth” aging-related se t of 230 genes
predicted from sequence data bySequenceAge .
2.1.5 Complementsofthe“groundtruth”aging-related data We
deﬁne a set of genes as the complement of a “ground truth” aging-related
data set if the genes are present in StatNetExpression butno t in the “ground
truth” data set. We denote the complements of BrainExpressi on2004Age,
BrainExpression2008Age, ADExpressionAge, HGPSExpressi onAge, and
SequenceAgeas BrainExpression2004Complement ,BrainExpression2008Complement ,
ADExpressionComplement ,HGPSExpressionComplement , andSequenceComplement ,
respectively.
All above data sets are deﬁned with respect to HPRD PPI data. F or
BioGRID data, see Supplementary Section S1.3.
2.2 Do globalnetworktopologieschangewith age?
Given the dynamic, age-speciﬁc PPI networks, we test whethe r the overall
(global)topologies ofthenetworkschangewithage.Wedoso bycomparing
thedifferentnetworkswithrespecttoseveralcommonlyuse dglobalnetwork
properties (Section 2.2.1), by evaluating the ﬁt of each of t he age-speciﬁc
networks to a series of well-known graph families, i.e., net work models
(Section 2.2.2) (Milenkovi´ c et al., 2008; Kuchaiev et al., 2011), and by
measuring the overlap of the age-speciﬁc networks (Section 2.2.3).
2.2.1 Comparing global properties of age-speciﬁc networks We
analyzethreeproperties:theaverageclusteringcoefﬁcie nt, averagediameter,
and graphlet frequency distribution (Memisevi´ c etal.,2010). Theproperties
aredeﬁned in Supplementary Section S1.4.
2.2.2 Evaluatingthe ﬁt ofage-speciﬁc networks todifferen t graph
families or network models We compare the ﬁt of the dynamic PPI
networkstodifferent graphfamilies, i.e.,networkmodels (Milenkovi´ c etal.,
2009), to test whether the best ﬁtting model changes with age . Various
network models have been proposed. We use: (1) Erd¨ os-R´ eny i random
graphs (ER), (2) generalized Erd¨ os-R´ enyi random graphs w ith same degree
distribution as the data (ERDD), (3) geometric random graph s (GEO), (4)
geometric gene duplication and mutation model (GEOGD), (5) scale-free
networks (SF), and (6) scale-free gene duplication and muta tion model
(SFGD) (Milenkovi´ c et al., 2008; Kuchaiev et al., 2011). To evaluate the
ﬁt of the data network to a given model, we compare the topolog y of the
data network to the topology of a random network instance dra wn from the
model with respect to a highly constraining measure of netwo rk topological
similarity called graphlet degree distribution agreement (GDD-agreement)
(Prˇ zulj, 2007). For details, see Supplementary Section S1 .5.
2.2.3 Computing the overlap between age-speciﬁc networks We
measure the overlap between each pair of age-speciﬁc networ ks as the
percentage of nodes (or edges) in the smaller of the two netwo rks that are
common to the two networks. For details, seeSupplementary S ection S1.6.2.3 Dolocaltopologiesofproteinschangewithage?
Westudytopological positions ofproteins ineach age-spec iﬁc network with
respect to seven node centrality measures (Section 2.3.1). We predict as
aging-related thoseproteins whosecentralities signiﬁca ntly change with age
(Section 2.3.2). Wevalidate our predictions in several way s (Section 2.3.3).
2.3.1 Local measures of topology or node centralities Various
centrality measures havebeen used to link topological impo rtance of anode
in the network to its functional importance. Below, we deﬁne each of the
seven measures thatweuseand provide biological justiﬁcat ion fortheir use.
Degree centrality (DEGC) measures the degree of a node in the network,
i.e., the number of the node’s neighbors. The higher the degr ee of a node,
the more central the node according to DEGC. Since current PP I networks
have“power-law”degreedistributions, withmanylow-degr eenodesandfew
high-degreenodes,andsinceremovalofthehigh-degreenod eswouldimpact
thenetworkstructure(bydisconnecting it),DEGCofageneh asbeenrelated
to the gene’s essentiality as well as its involvement in dise ase (Barab´ asi and
Oltvai, 2004; Sharan and Ideker, 2008).
Clustering coefﬁcient centrality (CLUSC) measures, for a given node,
how many pairs of neighbors of the node are connected by an edg e, out
of all pairs of the node’s neighbors. Intuitively, the more i nterconnected the
neighborhood ofthenode,themorecentralthenodeisaccord ingtoCLUSC.
In a PPI network, a node with high clustering coefﬁcient, tog ether with the
node’s neighbors, forms a highly interconnected network re gion, which is
likely to correspond to afunctional module (Barab´ asi and O ltvai, 2004).
K-coreof a network is a maximal subset of nodes in the network such
that each node is connected to at least kothers in the subset. K-coreness
centrality (KC)ofanodeis kifthenodeisin k-core.NodeswithhighKCin
thehumanPPInetworkhavebeenfoundtocorrespondto“cored iseaseome,”
a subnetwork that is signiﬁcantly enriched in disease genes and drug targets
(Janji´ c and Prˇ zulj, 2012),aswellasto inﬂuential “sprea ders” ofinformation
throughout thenetwork (Kitsak et al.,2010).
Graphlet degree centrality (GDC) measures how many graphlets a
node participates in, for all 2-5-node graphlets (Milenkov i´ cet al., 2011).
Intuitively, the more graphlets a node touches, the more cen tral the node
is according to GDC. Since it captures the extended network neighborhood
of a node, GDC is a highly sensitive measure of network topolo gy. Thus,
in a PPI network, proteins with high GDCs represent potentia l candidates
for therapeutic intervention, since targeting such protei ns with drugs would
havemoresigniﬁcantimpactonthenetworkstructurethanta rgeting proteins
that reside in sparse and non-complex network regions (Mile nkovi´ cet al.,
2011). Indeed, GDC has been found to capture well disease and pathogen-
interacting proteins and drug targets (Milenkovi´ c et al.,2011).
Betweenness centrality (BETWC) measures the involvement of a node
in the shortest paths in the network. Intuitively, nodes tha t occur in many
shortestpathshavehighcentrality according toBETWC.BET WCofnode v,
Cbetwc(v), is:Cbetwc(v) =/summationdisplay
s/ne}ationslash=v/ne}ationslash=t∈Vσst(v)
σst, whereVis the set of nodes
in the network, σstis the number of shortest paths between nodes sandt,
andσst(v)is the number of shortest paths between sandtthat go through
v. In a PPI network, BETWC of a protein indicates the “likeliho od” of the
protein to participate in pathways connecting all other pro teins (Kosch¨ utzki
and Schreiber, 2008). Removal of a protein that is on critica l pathways
between many other proteins could cause loss of communicati on between
the proteins. Also, targeting such a node with a drug could ca use the drug
effects tospreadfasttoallthenodes(Milenkovi´ c etal.,2011).Thisproperty
has been used to identify gene-disease associations by enco ding each gene
in the network based on the distribution of shortest path len gths to all genes
associated with disease (Radivojac et al., 2008). Also, see Kitsak et al.
(2010).
Closeness centrality (CLOSEC) measures the “closeness” of a node to
all other nodes in the network. Intuitively, nodes with smal l shortest path
distances to all other nodes have high centrality according to CLOSEC.
CLOSEC of node v,Cclosec(v), is:Cclosec(v) =1/summationtext
u∈Vσ(u,v), where
3FaisalandMilenkovi ´c
σ(u,v)is the shortest path distance between nodes uandv. In a PPI
network, CLOSEC of a protein indicates the “likelihood” of t he protein to
reach or be reachable from all other proteins (Scardoni et al., 2009). And it
has been a widely accepted assumption that proteins that are closer to each
other are morelikely to perform thesame function (Sharan etal., 2007).
Eccentricity centrality (ECC) is very related to CLOSEC, except that it
measures the “closeness” of a node onlyto thefarthestnode in the network
(Wuchty and Stadler, 2003). Intuitively, nodes with small s hortest path
distances to the furthest node in the network have high centr ality according
to ECC.ECC of node v,Cecc(v), is:Cecc(v) =1
maxu∈V{σ(u,v)}.
2.3.2 Prediction of aging-related genes For each measure, we
computecentrality values foranodeineachofthe30age-spe ciﬁc networks.
Then, we calculate Pearson or Spearman correlation between the 30 ages
and the node’s 30 centrality values (Supplementary Section S1.7). We do
this for all genes that are expressed in at least ﬁve ages in Lu et al.(2004)’s
brain gene expression data (Section 2.1.1). If such a gene is unexpressed
at a given age, we assign it a centrality value of zero at that a ge. Since
results are consistent for both correlation measures, here we report results
only for Pearson correlation. Results for Spearman correla tion are shown in
the Supplement.
We quantify the statistical signiﬁcance of the given correl ation value by
measuring the probability (i.e., p-value) of observing by chance a better
value (i.e., the same or higher value when the original value is positive, or
the same or lower value when the original value is negative). We do this
by randomly reshufﬂing the 30 node centrality values at the 3 0 ages and by
computing the resulting “random correlation”. Werepeat th is 1,000times to
get 1,000 random correlations. We compute the p-value as the percentage
of the 1,000 runs in which the random correlation is better th an the original
one. Wepredict a gene asaging-related if its p-value is below 0.01.
Since we study multiple node centralities, each of which can predict
the given gene as aging-related, we score our predictions so that the more
centrality measures support a prediction and the higher the signiﬁcance of
the change of its centrality values with age, the higher the s core and the
morecredible the prediction. For details, see Supplementa ry Section S1.7.
2.3.3 Validationof predicted aging-related genes
Statistical signiﬁcance of our predictions. To test whether our approach
of combining static network data with aging-related expres sion data into
the dynamic network data actually gives meaningful predict ions, we study
whether the number of aging-related genes that we predict fr om the actual
data is statistically signiﬁcantly larger than the number o f aging-related
genes that we predict from “randomized data”. By “randomize d data”,
we mean that we randomize the expression data before integra ting it with
the static network data (Supplementary Section S1.8). Then , we integrate
the randomized expression data with the static PPI network, construct
randomizedage-speciﬁc networksjustasinSection 2.1.3,a ndpredictaging-
related genes from the randomized networks just as in Sectio n 2.3.2. We
repeattheaboveprocedure multiple times,inordertoassig nap-valuetothe
number of predictions that we make from the actual data (Supp lementary
Section S1.8).
Overlap between genes of different data sets. We measure the statistical
signiﬁcance oftheoverlap ofgenes in onedatasetandgenes i n another data
set by using the hypergeometric test, which computes probab ilityp(i.e.,p-
value) of observing the same or larger overlap by chance as fo llows. Let E
denote the set ofgenes that are present in StatNetExpressio n.|E|= 6,397.
LetAdenote the subset of genes in Ethat are in any one of the two data
sets. LetGdenote thesubset ofgenes in Ethat are in the other data set. Let
Odenote the set of genes that are in the overlap between AandG. Then,p
is:p= 1−|O|−1/summationdisplay
i=0/parenleftbig|E|
i/parenrightbig/parenleftbig|E|−|A|
|G|−i/parenrightbig
/parenleftbig|E|
|G|/parenrightbig.Weusethe p-value threshold of 0.05.
Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment. We study the enrichment of a data set
in biological process GO terms (Ashburner et al., 2000). We use: 1) all4,913 GO terms that annotate (independent on the evidence co de) at least
two genes from StatNetExpression and 2) 2,088 GO terms that a nnotate
(withrespecttoanexperimental evidence codeonly)atleas ttwogenesfrom
StatNetExpression. ForaGOterm g,wecompute thestatistical signiﬁcance
ofitsenrichmentviatheabovehypergeometric testformula ,wherenow Eis
theset ofgenes from StatNetExpression that areannotated b y any GO term,
Ais the gene set in which we are measuring GO term enrichment, Gis the
subset of genes from Ethat are annotated by GO term g, andOis the set
of genes in the overlap between AandG. We use the p-value threshold of
0.05.
GO term overlap. We measure the statistical signiﬁcance of the overlap of
GOtermsenriched inonedatasetandGOtermsenriched inanot her dataset
via the above hypergeometric test formula, where now Eis the set of GO
terms that annotate at least two genes from StatNetExpressi on,Ais the set
of GO terms enriched in any one of the two data sets, Gis the set of GO
terms enriched in the other data set, and Ois the set of GO terms that are in
theoverlap between AandG.Weusethe p-value threshold of 0.05.
Disease Ontology (DO) enrichment. Westudy the enrichment of a data set
inall517DOtermsthat annotate atleasttwo genes fromStatN etExpression
(Duetal., 2009) in the sameway as when westudy GOterm enrichments.
DOtermoverlap. WestudytheoverlapofDOtermsfromdifferent datasets
in the sameway as when westudy GO term overlaps.
Literature validation. Weautomatically search for a gene in PubMed
(http://www.pubmed.gov) and consider the gene to be valida ted in the
context of aging if its name is mentioned (according to NCBI’ s E-utilities
– http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK25500/) with “a ge”, “aging”, or
“ageing” in the title or abstract of at least one article. Als o, wemanually
search for agene by reading relevant PubMed articles moreclosely .
3 RESULTSANDDISCUSSIONS
We study globaltopologies of the age-speciﬁc networks in Section
3.1. We study localtopologies of proteins in each network and
predict aging-related genes in Sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2. We validate
our predictions inSection3.2.3.
3.1 Globalnetworktopologiesdo notchangewith age
3.1.1 Global properties of age-speciﬁc networks are simila r
Average clustering coefﬁcients, average diameters, and gr aphlet
frequency distributions (Section 2.2.1) of the age-speciﬁ c networks
do not signiﬁcantly change with age (Supplementary Fig. S1 a nd
S2).
3.1.2 Networks at different ages belong to the same graph fam ily
We compare the ﬁt of the age-speciﬁc networks to six network
models(Section2.2.2).Thebest-ﬁttingmodeldoes notchan ge with
age (Supplementary Fig. S1 and S2). Note that our primary goa l
is not to identify the best-ﬁtting model for dynamic PPI netw orks.
Nonetheless, consistent to results for static PPI networks (Prˇ zulj
et al., 2010; Kuchaiev et al.,2011; Ratmann et al., 2009), it is gene
duplication models that ﬁtthe age-speciﬁc networks the bes t.
3.1.3 Overlap of age-speciﬁc networks islarge The age-speciﬁc
networks share on average 93% ofthe nodes and90% ofthe edges,
depending on age, while every pair of the networks shares at least
86% of the nodes and 79% of the edges (Supplementary Fig. S3).
Hence, the network overlaps are quite large.
3.2 Local topologiesofproteinsdo changewith age
3.2.1 Prediction of aging-related genes Gene expression data
alone revealed only 442 out of thousands of genes as aging-re lated
(Luet al., 2004). Thus, while global network analysis failed to
4Dynamicnetworksreveal keyplayersinaging
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Fig.2.Thenumberofourpredicted aging-related genes. Panel (a)showsthenumberofpredictions foreach ofseven nodecentra lities individually (BETWC,
CLOSEC, CLUSC, DEGC, ECC, GDC and KC) or by at least one of them (UNION). Panel (b)shows the number of genes predicted by exactly k
node centralities ( k= 1,2,...,7). In the panels, blue and red bars show the number of genes tha t are positively and negatively correlated with age,
respectively. Green bars denote the number of genes for whic h one centrality measure identiﬁes the given gene as positiv ely correlated with age, while
another measure identiﬁes the same gene as negatively corre lated with age. Panel (c)shows the overlaps of our predictions with aging-related ge nes from
BrainExpression2008Age “ground truth”data, foreach cent rality individually orforallcentralities combined. Inth epanel, blueandredbarsshowthenumber
of predicted genes that are absent from and present in the “gr ound truth” data, respectively. The p-values for the overlaps are noted at the top of the bars. The
results are consistent when we use Spearman correlation to p redict aging-related genes instead of Pearson correlation (Section 2.3.2 and Supplementary Fig.
S4).Also, theresults are consistent when weuseBioGRID dat a as the static PPInetwork instead of HPRDdata (Section 2.1. 3and Supplementary Fig. S5).
uncover anyaging-related information, itcould be that the dynamic
network data encodes aging-related information only local ly and
around only a subset of nodes. So, we use node centrality meas ures
(Section 2.3.1) to quantify local positions of nodes in the a ge-
speciﬁc networks and ﬁnd nodes whose centralities correlat e well
withage, as such proteins could be key players inaging.
We predict a gene as aging-related if its centrality values a re
statistically signiﬁcantly correlated with age (Section 2 .3.2) for at
least one centrality measure. This results in 515 (8.1%) pre dictions
out of all 6,397 genes. Fig. 2(a) shows the number of aging-re lated
predictions for each centrality individually and all centr alities
combined.Nocentralitypredictsdrasticallymoregenesth anothers.
Agene’scentralitycanbepositivelycorrelatedwithage(t hegene
becomes more network-central with age) or it can be negative ly
correlated with age (the gene becomes less central with age) . The
majority of our predictions are negatively correlated with age (Fig.
2).Thisﬁndingisencouraging, sinceithasalreadybeenarg uedthat
aging is associated with failure of “hubs” – highly intercon nected
andthus network-central proteins (Soltow et al.,2010).
3.2.2 Relationships and potential redundancies of differe nt node
centralities We predict a gene as aging-related if its centrality
valuescorrelate wellwithagewithrespectto atleastone centrality.
So, we study whether any genes are predicted by more than one o r
even all of the centralities. We ﬁnd that almost half (43%) of the
515aging-relatedpredictions aresupported bymultiplece ntralities,
while the remaining predictions are supported bya single ce ntrality
(Fig.2(b)).Asexpected,thenumber ofpredictionsdecreas esasthe
number of centralities supporting the predictions increas es.
We study the redundancy of the different centralities by
computing, for each pair of centralities, the correlation b etween
their centrality values over all nodes in the given network, and
by averaging correlations over the 30 age-speciﬁc networks . We
observe high correlations between some measures, such as DE GC,
KC,andGDC,orCLOSECandECC(Fig.3(a)andSupplementary
Section S2.1). Thus, some centralities appear to be redunda nt to
others.However, when we study pairwise overlaps of aging-related
predictions produced by the different centralities, the ov erlaps
are not very large for any pair of centralities (Fig. 3 (b)). T his
result, together with the result from Fig. 2 (b), which shows that
the majority ( ∼57%) of the predictions are identiﬁed by a single
centrality, suggests that the centralities are not redunda nt to each
other. When we focus on our aging-related genes predicted by
exactly one centrality measure, in most cases, these predic tions
are not even marginally signiﬁcant with respect to other cen trality
measures (Fig. 3(c) and Supplementary Fig. S6), indicating again
that the different centralities are in general not redundan t to each
other.Thus,wekeepall515predictions,independentonthe number
of centralities supporting the given prediction. Hencefor th, we
denote this set of 515 aging-related genes predicted via dyn amic
network analysis as DyNetAge . We denote the complement of this
set,i.e.,thesetofgenesthatarepresentinStatNetExpres sionbutnot
inDyNetAge,as DyNetComplement .Clearly,DyNetComplementis
thesetofgeneswhosecentralitiesdonotsigniﬁcantlycorr elatewith
age, and as such, we donot predict them as aging-related.
Next, we study the effect of the number of centralities
supporting a prediction on the quality of the prediction. It is not
necessarily the case that predictions supported by many cen tralities
are more enriched in “ground truth” aging-related genes (se e
below) compared to predictions supported by only few centra lities
(Supplementary Fig. S7). Nonetheless, it isthe case that the
more centralities support a prediction, the more signiﬁcan t the
correlation of its centrality values with age (as indicated by lower
p-values in Fig. 3(d)). Hence, to account for the number of
centralities supporting a prediction, we rank the predicti on so that
the more centralities support it and the more signiﬁcant the change
of its centrality values with age, the more credible the pred iction
(Section 2.3.2). (Supplementary Tables S1 and S2 contain th e
ranked lists of all predictions.) We validate our scoring sc heme
by demonstrating that our 10% highest-scoring predictions are
statistically signiﬁcantly enriched in genes that are pres ent in more
5FaisalandMilenkovi ´c
than one “ground truth” data set ( p-value of 0.003), whereas this is
not the case for the lower-scoringpredictions.
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
Fig. 3.Relationships between different centralities (BETWC, CLO SEC,
CLUSC, DEGC, ECC, GDC and KC): (a)Spearman correlation between
each pair of centralities averaged over the 30 age-speciﬁc n etworks;
(b)pairwise overlap of aging-related genes predicted by the di fferent
centralities; (c)percentage of genes predicted as aging-related ( p-value
≤0.01) by exactly one centrality (listed in a given row), whic h have a
“marginal” p-value between 0.01 and 0.05 with respect to one of the six
remaining centralities (listed in a given column), and (d)distributions of p-
values of our predicted aging-related genes. Panel (c) can b e interpreted as
follows. For example, many of the predictions identiﬁed onl y by CLOSEC
(the second last row) are marginally signiﬁcant with respec t to DEGC,
ECC, GDC, and KC (intensive color), while almost none of the p redictions
identiﬁed only by BETWC (the last row) are marginally signiﬁ cant with
respect to any other centrality (light color). Hence, the pr edictions made by
CLOSEConly may bemore credible than the predictions made by BETWC
only, as the former are marginally supported by additional c entralities, but
the latter arenot.
3.2.3 Validationof predicted aging-related genes
Dynamic network analysis gives meaningful and statistical ly
signiﬁcant aging-related predictions. The number of aging-
related genes in DyNetAge is statistically signiﬁcantly la rger than
the number of aging-related genes that we can predict from
the “randomized” data ( Z-score= 7.42,p-value<10−10;
Section2.3.3).
Overlap of our predictions with “ground truth” aging-relat ed
genes is statistically signiﬁcant. Human aging is hard to study
experimentallyduetolonglifespanandethicalconstraint s.Instead,
human aging-related “ground truth” knowledge has been predicted
more or less computationally , by studying gene expression data
or by transferring aging-related knowledge from model spec ies to
human via sequence comparison. (We intentionally use quote s,
as we are notdealing with true, experimentally obtained ground
truth data.) Similarly, here, we aim to computationally pre dict
new “ground truth” aging-related data from an additional da ta type– PPIs. (But by no means do we claim to identify allaging-
related genes.) Hence, since “ground truth” data sets are pr edicted
computationally, they could be noisy. Also, different “gro und
truth” sets could be biased towards different data types fro m which
the predictions have been made, be it expression, sequence, or
PPI data. Since different data types could be capturing diff erent
functional slices of the cell (Memiˇ sevi´ c et al., 2010; Przytycka
and Kim, 2010), it might not be alarming if the intersections
between the different “ground truth” sets are not very large .
However,sinceallthesetsareaimingtocapturethesamebio logical
phenomenon (aging), some overlap would be encouraging. Ide ally,
we would like to see a statistically signiﬁcant overlap. How ever,
the existence of some overlap would be encouraging even if th e
overlap was not signiﬁcant, since: (1) the overlap could be l ow
due to the noisiness of each of the “ground truth” sets, and (2 )
statistically non-signiﬁcant results may be biologically important,
whereasstatisticallysigniﬁcantresultsmaynotbe(Motul sky,1995;
Milenkovi´ c et al.,2010a; Ho etal., 2010).
We measure the overlap of DyNetAge with ﬁve “ground truth”
data sets: BrainExpression2004Age, BrainExpression2008 Age,
ADExpressionAge, HGPSExpressionAge, and SequenceAge
(Section 2.1.4). Of the ﬁve, BrainExpression2004Age and
BrainExpression2008Age are the most likely to be similar to
DyNetAge (as all three are based on brain-related data, brain-
relatedgene expression data, and brain aging-related gene
expression data; Supplementary Section S2.2), followed by
ADExpressionAge (as our predictions as well as this data are
both based on brain-related data and brain-related gene expression
data), followed by HGPSExpressionAge (as our predictions a s
well as this data are both based on gene expression data),
followed by SequenceAge (as our predictions and this data
both capture aging-related information but from different data
types) (Section 2.1.4). Therefore, a high overlap of DyNetA ge
with BrainExpression2004Age or BrainExpression2008Age w ould
validate our method. A highoverlap withADExpressionAge wo uld
suggest that our method could capture not only brain aging-r elated
genes but also brain aging-related diseasegenes. A high overlap
with HGPSExpressionAge would suggest that our method could
capture genes related to a tissue different from the brain ti ssue.
A high overlap with SequenceAge would suggest that our metho d
could capture genes identiﬁed from a different data type, na mely
sequence data.
As hypothesized, DyNetAge overlaps the most (as indicated
by the lowest p-values) with BrainExpression2004Age and
BrainExpression2008Age,followedbyADExpressionAge,HG PSExpressionAge,
and SequenceAge, respectively (Supplementary Fig. S8 and
Supplementary Table S3). The overlap is statistically sign iﬁcant
for BrainExpression2004Age, BrainExpression2008Age, an d
ADExpressionAge,marginallysigniﬁcantforHGPSExpressi onAge,
and non-signiﬁcant for SequenceAge (Table 1). The (margina lly)
signiﬁcant overlap between DyNetAge and four out of the
ﬁve “ground truth” data sets is encouraging. Importantly, e ven
though most of the overlaps are statistically signiﬁcant, 8 7%,
31%, 74%, 87%, and 96% of our DyNetAge predictions
are not in BrainExpression2004Age, BrainExpression2008A ge,
ADExpressionAge, HGPSExpressionAge, and SequenceAge,
respectively, and 19% of our predictions are not in anyof the
ﬁve data sets (Supplementary Table S4). This conﬁrms that da ta
6Dynamicnetworksreveal keyplayersinaging
integrationcanreveal additional biological knowledge compared to
studying individual data types.
Some overlap between DyNetAge and SequenceAge is also
encouraging, even though the overlap is non-signiﬁcant (as argued
above). Further, the overlap is stronger between DyNetAge and
the other four “ground truth” data sets (BrainExpression20 04Age,
BrainExpression2008Age,ADExpressionAge,andHGPSExpre ssionAge)
than between SequenceAge and these four “ground truth” data
sets. In particular, whereas DyNetAge overlaps signiﬁcant ly with
three of the four data sets and marginally signiﬁcantly with
respect to the fourth data set (see above), SequenceAge over laps
signiﬁcantlywithjustoneofthefourdatasets(ADExpressi onAge),
almost marginally signiﬁcantly with respect to two of the fo ur
data sets (HGPSExpressionAge and BrainExpression2004Age ),
and non-signiﬁcantly with respect to the remaining data set
(BrainExpression2008Age) (Supplementary Table S3). Ther efore,
our DyNetAge appears to be more relevant than SequenceAge wi th
respect to the other “ground truth” data sets. The non-signi ﬁcant
overlaps could be due to potential complementarity of the di fferent
types of biological data, noisiness of the “ground truth” da ta,
or some of the “ground truth” data sets being biased towards
brain-relatedgenes.
Recall that the complement of each “ground truth” data set
(including DyNetAge) is the set of genes not predicted as agi ng-
related by the given study (Section 2.1.5). Hence, it would b e
encouraging to see: 1)low (non-signiﬁcant) overlaps between
DyNetAge and complements of the “ground truth” data sets, 2)
low (non-signiﬁcant) overlaps between DyNetComplement an d
“ground truth” sets, and 3)high (signiﬁcant) overlaps between
DyNetComplement and complements of “ground truth” sets.
Indeed, this is what we typically observe in all three cases
(Supplementary TableS3).
Table 1. Overlap and its statistical signiﬁcance (i.e. p-value) between
aging-related genes (ARG), GO terms (GO), and DO terms (DO)
in DyNetAge and those in the ﬁve “ground truth” aging-relate d
data sets (BrainExpression2004Age (BE4A), BrainExpressi on2008Age
(BE8A), ADExpressionAge (ADEA), HGPSExpressionAge (HEA) , and
SequenceAge (SA)).
BE4A BE8A ADEA HEASA
ARGOverlap 20% 69% 26%13%9%
p-value5.5E-13 <1E-154.3E-7 0.060.39
GOOverlap 20% 21% 12% 6%17%
p-value1.2E-10 2.5E-14 2.8E-6 0.280.33
DOOverlap 25% 25% 0%0%25%
p-value 0.03 7.2E-3 N/AN/A0.70
GO enrichment. When analyzing all gene-GO term associations,
146 GO terms are signiﬁcantly enriched in DyNetAge ( p-values
between 0.047and1.5×10−5), while only 14 GO terms are
enriched inDyNetComplement ( p-values between 0.043and5.1×
10−5) (Section 2.3.3). Importantly, there is no overlap between
the GO terms from DyNetAge and those from DyNetComplement.
Hence, our aging-related predictions group by functions th at are
different than functions of genes that we do not predict as ag ing-
related.
Whenwefocuson aging-related GOtermsonly,itisencouraging
that DyNetAge contains genes annotated with aging,cell aging ,
andcellular senescence GO terms, as well as that DyNetAge’sperformance is typically comparable to that of the “ground t ruth”
data, especially when using only gene-GO term associations
obtained by experimental evidence codes (Supplementary Section
S2.3).
GO overlap. Our predictions are further validated by: 1)high
overlaps between GO terms from DyNetAge and GO terms
from the “ground truth” data sets, 2)low overlaps between
GO terms from DyNetAge and GO terms from complements
of the “ground truth” sets, 3)low overlaps between GO
terms from DyNetComplement and GO terms from the “ground
truth” sets, and 4)high overlaps between GO terms from
DyNetComplement and GO terms from complements of the
“ground truth” sets (Table 1 and Supplementary Table S5).
For example, when considering gene-GO term associations of
any evidence code, GO terms from DyNetAge signiﬁcantly
overlap with GO terms from three of the ﬁve “ground truth”
datasets(BrainExpression2004Age, BrainExpression2008 Age, and
ADExpressionAge), and some (though non-signiﬁcant) overl ap
with GO terms from HGPSExpressionAge and SequenceAge is
also encouraging (Table 1). Equivalent results when consid ering
gene-GO term associations of experimental evidence codes only
are shown in Supplementary Table S6. Importantly, in this ca se,
SequenceAge fails to signiﬁcantly overlap with any other “g round
truth” set, whereas DyNetAge still signiﬁcantly overlaps w ith
BrainExpression2008Age. For details, see Supplementary S ection
S2.4.
DO enrichment. Eight diseases are signiﬁcantly enriched in
DyNetAge ( p-values between 0.041and6×10−3), while 14
diseases are enriched in DyNetComplement ( p-values between
0.049and2.9×10−3) (Section 2.3.3). Importantly, there is
no overlap between diseases from DyNetAge and those from
DyNetComplement.
The eight diseases in DyNetAge are: brain disease, brain
tumor, bipolar disorder, connective tissue disease, renal tubular
acidosis, leukodystrophy, neuroblastoma, and demyelinat ing
disease. Brain disease andrenal tubular acidosis are enriched
in SequenceAge as well, brain disease andbipolar disorder are
enriched in BrainExpression2004Age as well, and brain tumor
andneuroblastoma are enriched in BrainExpression2008Age as
well. All of these overlaps are encouraging. (We quantify th e
signiﬁcance of the overlaps in the following section.) In pa rticular,
renal tubular acidosis , whose aging-related evidence is supported
by SequenceAge, is kidney-related, whereas DyNetAge has be en
predicted from the brain-related data. Capturing this non- brain-
related disease in DyNetAge is encouraging, especially bec ause
BrainExpression2004Age and BrainExpression2008Age fail to do
so. Further aging-related evidence for these ﬁve diseases c an
be found in the following references denoted by their PubMed
IDs (PMIDs): 11256685, 8040891, 21197651, and 21031036.
Supplementary Table S7 maps PMIDs to full paper references.
Importantly, even three diseases from DyNetAge that are mis sed
byall“ground truth” sets can allbe linked toaging in the literature
as well (Supplementary SectionS2.5).
DO overlap. We further validate our predictions by demonstrating:
1)high overlaps between DO terms from DyNetAge and DO
terms from the “ground truth” data sets, 2)low overlaps between
DO terms from DyNetAge and DO terms from complements of
the “ground truth” sets, 3)low overlaps between DO terms from
7FaisalandMilenkovi ´c
DyNetComplement and DO terms from the “groung truth” sets,
and4)high overlaps between DO terms from DyNetComplement
and DO terms from complements of the “ground truth” sets
(SupplementaryTableS8).Forexample,DOtermsfromDyNetA ge
statistically signiﬁcantly overlap with DO terms from two o f
the ﬁve “ground truth” data sets (BrainExpression2004Age a nd
BrainExpression2008Age) (Table 1). It is not alarming that
DyNetAge does not signiﬁcantly overlap with ADExpressionA ge,
HGPSExpressionAge, or SequenceAge, since none of the three
overlaps signiﬁcantly withmore than one of the ﬁve “ground t ruth”
data sets (Supplementary Table S8). Hence, DyNetAge is bett er
supported by the “ground truth” data than any of these three d ata
sets.For details,see Supplementary Sections S2.6andS2.7 .
Literature validation. Automatic literature validation (Section
2.3.3) is prone to errors: we “validate” inthis manner equal portion
ofboththe“groundtruth”aging-relatedsets andtheircomplements.
Therefore, we aim to validate our predictions manually (Sec tion
2.3.3). Since manual validation is laborious, we focus on ou r
10% highest-scoring predictions (Section 2.3.2). Of these , we
study predictions that are absent from all “ground truth” se ts,
namely DVL1, ACACA, HOMER3, GJB1, FKBP8, and H1F0.
We successfully validate allof these genes. DVL1 has been
linked to Alzheimer’s disease (PMID: 11803455), which has b een
linked to aging itself (PMID: 21197651, 21031036). Express ion
level of ACACA in rat changes with age (PMID: 11044254), and
so its human ortholog is an aging-related candidate. HOMER-
1A, a member of the same family as HOMER3, affects the
level of cognitive performance during aging (PMID: 2305482 6).
The expression of GJB1 is down-regulated with aging (PMID:
22337502). DrugtargetingofFKBP38mightsuccessfullyint ervene
with FKBP38-dependent processes such as programmed cell de ath
in cancer or neurodegenerative diseases (PMID: 21514222), which
have beenlinkedtoaging(PMID:21197651, 21031036). H1F0h as
beenlinkedtoage-relatedmaculardegeneration(PMID:165 18403),
and its rat ortholog causes aging-related alterations in li ver (PMID:
8114518).
4 CONCLUSION
Together, our results conﬁrm that dynamic PPI network analy sis
via integration of static PPI network data with aging-relat ed gene
expression data canreveal meaningful keyplayers inaging.
Funding: NSFEAGERCCF-1243295 grant.
REFERENCES
Aragues, R., Sander, C. and Oliva, B. (2008) Predicting canc er involvement of genes
from heterogeneousdata. BMCBioinformatics ,9,172.
Ashburner, M. et al.(2000) Gene ontology: tool for the uniﬁcation of biology. Nature
Genetics,25,25–29.
Barab´ asi, A. L. and Oltvai, Z. (2004) Network biology: Unde rstanding the cell’s
functional organization. NatureReviews ,5,101–113.
Berchtold, N. C. et al.(2008) Gene expression changes in the course of normal brain
agingare sexuallydimorphic. PNAS,105,15605–10.
Breitkreutz, B. J. et al.(2008) The BioGRID Interaction Database: 2008 update.
NucleicAcidsResearch ,36,D637–D640.
de Magalh˜ aes, J. (2009) Aging research in the post-genome e ra: New technologies
for an old problem. In Foyer, C., Faragher, R. and Thornalley , P. (eds.), Redox
MetabolismandLongevityRelationshipsinAnimalsandPlan ts,pp.99–115.Taylor
andFrancis,NewYork.
de Magalh˜ aes, J. et al.(2009) The Human Ageing Genomic Resources: online
databasesandtools for biogerontologists. Aging Cell ,8, 65–72.
Du, P.et al.(2009) From diseaseontology to disease-ontology lite: sta tistical methods
to adapt a general-purpose ontology for the test of gene-ont ology associations.Bioinformatics ,25,i63–68.
Dyer,M.,Murali,T.andSobral,B.(2008)Thelandscapeofhu manproteinsinteracting
with virusesand other pathogens. PLoSPathog ,4,e32+.
Ferrarini,L.,Bertelli,L.,Feala,J.,McCulloch,A.D.and Paternostro,G.(2005)Amore
efﬁcient search strategy for aging genes based on connectiv ity.Bioinformatics ,21,
338–348.
Fortney, K., Kotlyar, M. and Jurisica, I. (2010) Inferring t he functions of longevity
genes with modular subnetwork biomarkers of Caenorhabditi s elegans aging.
Genome Biology ,11,R13+.
Goh,K.etal.(2007) Thehuman diseasenetwork. PNAS,104,8685–8690.
Ho, H.et al.(2010) Protein interaction network uncovers melanogenesi s regulatory
network components within functional genomics datasets. BMC Systems Biology ,
4.
Janji´ c,V.andPrˇ zulj,N.(2012)Thecorediseasome. MolecularbioSystems ,8,2614–25.
Jeong,H.,Mason,S.P.,Barab´ asi,A.L.andOltvai,Z.N.(20 01)Lethalityandcentrality
in protein networks. Nature,411,41–2.
Jonsson, P. F. and Bates, P. A. (2006) Lobal topological feat ures of cancer proteins in
the human interactome. Bioinformatics ,22,2291–2297.
Kitsak, M. et al.(2010) Identiﬁcation of inﬂuential spreaders in complex ne tworks.
NaturePhysics ,6,888–893.
Kosch¨ utzki, D. and Schreiber, F. (2008) Centrality analys is methods for biological
networks and their application to gene regulatory networks .Gene Regulation and
SystemsBiology ,2,193–201.
Kriete,A.,Lechner,M.,Clearﬁeld,D.andBohmann,D.(2011 )Computationalsystems
biology of aging. Wiley InterdiscipRevSystBiol Med ,3,414–28.
Kuchaiev, O., Stevanovi´ c, A., Hayes, W. and Prˇ zulj, N. (20 11) GraphCrunch 2:
Softwaretoolfornetworkmodeling,alignmentandclusteri ng.BMCBioinformatics ,
12.
Liu, G.-H. et al.(2011) Recapitulation of premature ageing with ipscs from
hutchinsongilford progeria syndrome. Nature,472, 221–5.
Lu, T.et al.(2004) Gene regulation and DNA damage in the ageing human bra in.
Nature,429,883–891.
Memisevi´ c, V., Milenkovi´ c, T. and Prˇ zulj, N. (2010) An in tegrative approach to
modeling biological networks. Journalof IntegrativeBioinformatics ,7,120.
Memiˇ sevi´ c, V., Milenkovi´ c, T. and Prˇ zulj, N. (2010) Com plementarity of network
and sequence information in homologous proteins. Journal of Integrative
Bioinformatics ,7,135.
Milenkovi´ c, T., Filippis, I., Lappe, M. and Prˇ zulj, N. (20 09) Optimized null model for
protein structurenetworks. PLoS ONE ,4,e5967.
Milenkovi´ c, T., Lai, J. and Prˇ zulj, N. (2008) GraphCrunch : a tool for large network
analyses. BMCBioinformatics ,9.
Milenkovi´ c, T., Memisevi´ c, V., Ganesan, A. K. and Prˇ zulj , N. (2010a) Systems-level
cancer gene identiﬁcation from protein interaction networ k topology applied to
melanogenesis-related interaction networks. Journalof theRoyalSociety Interface ,
7, 423–437.
Milenkovi´ c,T.,Memiˇ sevi´ c,V.,Bonato,A.andPrˇ zulj,N .(2011)Dominatingbiological
networks. PLoS ONE ,6,e23016.
Milenkovi´ c, T., Ng, W., Hayes, W. and Prˇ zulj, N. (2010b) Op timal network alignment
with graphlet degree vectors. CancerInformatics ,9,121–137.
Milenkovi´ c, T. and Prˇ zulj, N. (2008) Uncovering biologic al network function via
graphlet degree signatures. CancerInformatics ,6,257–273.
Motulsky,H.(1995) Intuitive Biostatistics . Oxford UniversityPress,1edition.
Pastor-Satorras, R., Smith, E. and Sole, R. V. (2003) Evolvi ng protein interaction
networks through geneduplication. Journalof TheoreticalBiology ,222,199–210.
Peri, S.et al.(2004) Human protein reference database as a discovery reso urce for
proteomics. Nucleic Acids Res ,32 Database issue , D497–501. 1362-4962Journal
Article.
Promislow, D. (2004) Protein networks, pleiotropy and the e volution of senescence.
Proceedingsof theRoyalSociety B:Biological Sciences ,1545, 1225–1234.
Prˇ zulj, N. (2007) Biological network comparison using gra phlet degree distribution.
Bioinformatics ,23,e177–e183.
Prˇ zulj, N. (2011) Protein-protein interactions: Making s ense of networks via graph-
theoretic modeling. Bioessays ,33,115–123.
Prˇ zulj, N.,Kuchaiev, O.,Stevanovi´ c,A. and Hayes,W.(20 10) Geometric evolutionary
dynamics of protein interaction networks. Paciﬁc SymposiumonBiocomputing ,pp.
178–89.
Przytycka, T.and Kim, Y. (2010) Network integration meets n etwork dynamics. BMC
Biology,8,48+.
Radivojac,P. etal.(2008)Anintegratedapproachtoinferringgene-diseaseas sociations
in humans. Proteins,72,1030–1037.
8Dynamicnetworksreveal keyplayersinaging
Ratmann, O., Wiuf, C. and Pinney, J. W. (2009) From evidence t o inference: probing
the evolutionof protein interaction networks. HFSPJournal ,3, 290–306.
Reja, R. et al.(2009) MitoInteractome: mitochondrial protein interacto me database,
and itsapplication in ’aging network’ analysis. BMCgenomics ,10 Suppl 3 ,S20+.
Scardoni, G., Petterlini, M. and Laudanna, C. (2009) Analyz ing biological network
parameters with centiscape. Bioinformatics ,25,2857–2859.
Sharan, R. and Ideker, T. (2008) Protein networks in disease .Genome Research ,18,
644–652.
Sharan, R., Ulitsky, I. and Shamir, R. (2007) Network-based prediction of protein
function. Molecular SystemsBiology ,3,1–13.
S˝ oti, C. and Csermely, P. (2007) Aging cellular networks: C haperones as major
participants. ExperimentalGerontology ,42,113–119.
Simpson, J. E. et al.(2011) Microarray analysis of the astrocyte transcriptome in the
agingbrain:relationshiptoalzheimer’spathologyandapo egenotype. Neurobiologyof Aging,32,1795–807.
Soltow, Q.,Jones,D.andPromislow, D.(2010) ANetwork Pers pectiveonMetabolism
and Aging. Integrative andcomparative biology ,50, 844–854.
Vanunu, O., Magger, O., Ruppin, E., Shlomi, T. and Sharan, R. (2010) Associating
genes and protein complexes with disease via network propag ation.PLoS
Computational Biology ,6,e1000641.
Wieser, D., Papatheodorou, I., Ziehm, M. and Thornton, J. (2 011) Computational
biology for ageing. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biologi cal
Sciences,366, 51–63.
Wuchty, S. and Stadler, P. F. (2003) Centers of complex netwo rks.Journal of
Theoretical Biology ,223,45–53.
9