Title: Extra-cellular matrix rigidity may dictate the fate of injury outcome
Abstract:   After injury, if regeneration can be observed in hydra, planaria and some
vertebrates, regeneration is rare in mammals and particularly in humans. In
this paper, we investigate the mechanisms by which biological tissues recover
after injury. We explore this question on adipose tissue, using the
mathematical framework recently developed in Peurichard et al, J. Theoret.
Biol. 429 (2017), pp. 61-81. Our assumption is that simple mechanical cues
between the Extra-Cellular Matrix (ECM) and differentiated cells can explain
adipose tissue morphogenesis and that regeneration requires after injury the
same mechanisms. We validate this hypothesis by means of a two-dimensional
Individual Based Model (IBM) of interacting adipocytes and ECM fiber elements.
The model successfully generates regeneration or scar formation as functions of
few key parameters, and seems to indicate that the fate of injury outcome could
be mainly due to ECM rigidity.

Full Text: Extra-cellular matrix rigidity may dictate the fate of injury
outcome
D. Peurichard1, M. Ousset2, J. Paupert2, B. Aymard3, A. Lorsignol2, L. Casteilla2,
and P. Degond4
1INRIA Paris, 2, rue Simone I, 75589 Paris Cedex 12, France
2STROMALab, Universit de Toulouse, Inserm U1031, EFS, INP-ENVT, UPS, CNRS ERL5311,
Toulouse, France Batiment INCERE, 4 bis Avenue Hubert Curien 31100 Toulouse, 31 432 Toulouse
France
3MathNeuro Team, Inria Sophia Antipolis Mditerrane, 2004 Route des Lucioles, BP93, 06902 Valbonne
cedex, France
4Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom.
Abstract
After injury, while regeneration can be observed in hydra, planaria and some vertebrates,
regeneration is rare in mammals and particularly in humans. In this paper, we investigate
the mechanisms by which biological tissues recover after injury. We explore this question on
adipose tissue, using the mathematical framework recently developed in Peurichard et al.,
J. Theoret. Biol. 429 (2017), pp. 61-81. Our assumption is that simple mechanical cues
between the Extra-Cellular Matrix (ECM) and dierentiated cells can explain adipose tissue
morphogenesis and that regeneration requires after injury the same mechanisms. We validate
this hypothesis by means of a two-dimensional Individual Based Model (IBM) of interacting
adipocytes and ECM ber elements. The model successfully generates regeneration or scar
formation as functions of few key parameters, and seems to indicate that the fate of injury
outcome could be mainly due to ECM rigidity.
Key words: regeneration, individual-based model, constrained minimization, tissue remod-
eling, ber insemination
1 Introduction
The discoveries of stem cells largely open the door for the development of regenerative medicine
and address many issues on regeneration processes and their basic cues. Regeneration is described
as the come back to the initial shape and function of a tissue or organ after injury. Largely
described and investigated in animal models such as hydra, zebra sh or salamander, regeneration
was considered as largely impaired in adult mammals for the benet of a brotic scar after healing
obligatory associated with dysfunctions. In mammals, regenerative capacities seem present until
a few days after birth and then further replaced by healing and scar formation in adult. This
strongly suggests that regeneration could take place in adult mammals but is inhibited during
postnatal development [1, 2, 3] and that brosis impairs tissue regeneration. The possibility to
circumvent this inhibition and to identify basic cues to re-induce regeneration in adults represents
a fundamental challenge in regenerative medicine. One of these issues is to investigate whether
basic cues driving the development of mature tissues and organs could be similarly involved in the
post-injury rebuilding of these mature tissues. Because of the severe pandemic rise of obesity and
several associated diseases (diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, metabolic disorders, cancer), adipose
tissue (AT) has become a growing point of interest in the last decades. Previously considered as
a passive energy store, AT is now recognized to be an important endocrine organ involved in all
physiological functions [35]. Beside this historical role related to its metabolic functions, adipose
pad is classically removed in obese people or injected in patients for plastic and reconstructive
1arXiv:1811.12315v2  [q-bio.TO]  3 Mar 2019surgery although, its true regenerative capabilities after lipectomy are poorly documented [51].
It also recently emerges as a reservoir of therapeutic multipotent adipose-derived stromal/stem
cells (ASCs) for regenerative medicine [41, 62]. These cells have been extensively investigated
and increasingly tested and used in clinical trials [38]. Therefore, understanding the mechanisms
involved in adipose tissue morphogenesis and homeostasis is of major importance either to limit
its expansion or to promote and regenerate it according to the applicative elds. Alternatively and
independently of these applied interests, AT can be considered as a model because it is a relatively
simple organ, composed of mature adipocytes with a spherical shape composed of lipid droplets
storing excess energy and a population of other cells (endothelial, immune cells, broblast-like cells
[57]) among which ASCs that behave as adipocyte progenitors. In white AT, the dierentiated
adipocytes are densely packed together in specic structures referred to as lobules, surrounded by an
organized (aligned) collagen ber network [60]. These cellular and brous structures show dierent
organization according to the location in the tissue as well as according to states of development
and pathologies. These global organization and structure largely impact the functioning of the
tissue and metabolic dys-regulations of AT are associated with the development of brosis in obese
patients [20, 20, 44].
Assuming that the structuring agents contributing the most to adipose tissue emergence are
the Extra-Cellular Matrix (ECM) bers and the adipocytes interactions [46], we proposed a 2D
individual based model (IBM) which produces structures quantitatively similar (shape of the cell
clusters in particular) to the experimental observations of healthy AT in adults. This model
indicates that AT homeostasis and organization could spontaneously emerge as a result of simple
mechanical interactions between dierentiated cells (i.e. adipocytes) and bers. Our model bears
analogies with the model of [6], in which an individual based model for the simulation of intestinal
organoid formation in the gut is discussed. The main dierences between our model and that of
[6] lie in the way the Extra-Cellular Matrix and its interactions with the cells are modelled. In
[6], the basal membrane is described by a sti triangulated network modelling interlinked long
polymer molecules. The network edges can stretch or compress and the network nodes may move
in response to the forces exerted by the cells. However, network reorganization does not occur
spontaneously but only when some faces are too large or too small, which triggers the insertion
or deletion of a vertex. The present model allows for ECM spontaneous reorganization via the
creation and suppression of links dynamically in time. Thus, in the present paper, the ECM has
the ability to reorganize independently from the action of the cells. This is a key feature which
allows us to explore how the ECM remodelling capability inuences the regeneration process.
Another dierence is cell adhesion to the ECM which is key to [6] and is not considered here,
because cell-ber repulsion is sucient to provide containment of cells.
The goal of the present study is, via a mathematical model based on our previously developed
2D-IBM and using the same framework, to investigate whether the same rules drive the fate of
AT reconstruction after injury. To this aim, we rst summarize the main steps of tissue repair,
which consist of three phases (summarized in Fig. 1 left) : Hemostasis/inammation, proliferation
and remodeling/maturation. The rst stage of acute tissue repair is dedicated to stop bleeding
(hemostasis) and damaged-cell death. Cell death is characterized by rupture of the cell membrane
and release of intracellular factors. This release induces an acute inammation which is associated
to specic immune cell type recruitment responsible for phagocytosis of dead cell debris but also
for the production of the anti-inammatory cytokines required for the down-regulation of the in-
ammatory response and necessary to prevent further inammation-related damages. Progressive
resolution of inammation is ultimately responsible for the passage from a necrotic environment
to one favorable to stem cells homing, proliferation and dierentiation necessary to tissue repair.
This proliferation stage is associated to granulation tissue formation characterized by deposition of
an immature provisional ECM, composed of poorly organized brous components. In parallel, this
environment induces broblasts dierentiation into myobroblasts, responsible of brous collagen
synthesis, which marks the transition to remodeling stage. This maturation phase allows terminal
dierentiation of progenitor cells and remodeling of collagen-enriched ECM. ECM remodeling and
maturation in a strongly organized network is controlled by its synthesis, its degradation proper-
ties as well as by its post-translational modications such as ber cross-linking ensured by specic
enzymes. This remodeling is a key step in driving tissue regeneration since collagen accumulation
upon tissue repair is associated with brotic scar formation. This brosis alters tissue mechanical
2Creation of chemical components 
at the edge of the wound:
- block stem cell differentiation
- Trigger fiber insemination
- Diffuse in the tissue
- Finite lifetime
Creation of new fibers at the edge of the wound
where local density of cells is low
Maximal local density of agent reached
=> Fiber insemination stopsExtinction of chemical components:
=> stem cell differentiation where local density 
of linked ECM is lowPhases of tissue repairModelling steps
Initial condition
Equilibrium state
Figure 1: Left: Schematic view of the three phases of tissue repair: Hemostasis/inammation,
proliferation and remodeling/maturation. Right: Schematic view of the model components at
dierent time points.
properties especially increasing its stiness and eventually impairs tissue regeneration.
The model developed in this paper is based on an existing model [46] which we modify to
take into consideration the previously described phases of tissue repair. In section 2., we will rst
present the main ingredients of the model and motivate the choice of the model parameter values
with biological measurements (section 2). Section 3. is devoted to numerical results: in sections
3.1 and 3.2, we show numerical results which we compare qualitatively to biological observations,
and in section 3.3 we quantify the numerical structures obtained to study the inuence of key
model parameters on the tissue reconstruction abilities after injury.
2 Methods
2.1 Biological experiments
In Fig. 2, we show biological images of inguinal adipose tissue in non-injured conditions (A) and in
regenerative (B) or scar (C) conditions one month after injury. Adipocytes (Red) were stained with
Bodipy and collagen bers (green) were imaged using collagen SHG (Second Harmonic Generation)
signal (see Appendix B for more details on the methods). As one can observe in Figs. 2, the
adipocyte lobules and ECM structures are reconstructed 1 month post-injury for regenerative
tissues while the injured zone in scar conditions is lled with a very sti ECM network with very
few adipocytes.
2.2 Description of the model
(i) Introduction of new bers/cells. To create a simulation framework that addresses the mechan-
ical features of adipogenesis and homeostasis, a 2D individual based model (IBM) was introduced
in [46]. Here, we use the same framework to model tissue repair after injury. ECM bers are
discretized into unit ber elements consisting of line segments of xed and uniform lengths repre-
sented by their centers and their directional unit vectors. In the previous model, we supposed that
two ber elements that cross each other can form links, thereby creating longer bers. By analogy
with what is observed in vivo, these segments represent collagen bers as they are secreted in the
3Uninjured tissueRegenerated tissue
1 month post-injuryScar tissue
1 month post-injury
Figure 2: Biological images of inguinal adipose tissue (AT) in non-injured conditions (A) and in
regenerative (B) or scar (C) conditions one month after injury. Adipocytes (Red) were stained with
Bodipy and collagen bers (green) were imaged using collagen SHG (Second Harmonic Generation)
signal. Images were obtained using average intensity projections of 8 (A), 7(B) and 5(C) stack
images. The white scale bars at the bottom right correspond to 150 m.
extracellular compartment in vivo and their ability to be cross-linked. The cells/adipocytes are
described as 2D spheres represented by their centers and radii. The dierentiation of immature
cells into adipocytes is represented by their ability to grow regularly in size (hypertrophy). At any
given time, the two sets of agents are supposed to realize the minimum of the mechanical energy
of the system (further described). To model tissue injury, we start with situations of tissues at
equilibrium, and remove all the components (cells and bers) present in a given zone of the domain.
Thus, to drive the emergence of bers at the leading edge of the wound, we create a gradient which
triggers ber insemination. This gradient is generated by a ux of chemical components produced
by surrounding cells, mimicking secretions of cells acting during inammatory and proliferation
phases (see Fig. 1 right). The wound is lled with new bers and the injury signaling chemicals
disappear, enabling maturation of new adipocytes. All these phenomena force the cells and bers
to move in order to reach a new equilibrium. New bers are inseminated randomly in time via a
Poisson process of frequency f(X) which negatively depends on the agent local density and its
gradient and which has typical value 
f, an agent being either a cell or a ber element. Therefore,
ber insemination is supposed to occur more likely on the boundaries of the wound and where
the agent density does not exceed a given threshold (to avoid accumulation of bers). As we
do not model proliferating broblasts for the sake of simplicity, the collagen ber elements are
supposed to spontaneously emerge at the borders of the wound. Fiber elements in our model are
not intended to reproduce a whole biological structured ber too long to be represented by a single
short ber element but they rather produce a discretization of such bers into rigid elements that
can be computationally manipulated. At initialization, the insemination of a new ber is modeled
by the insemination of a group of 4 ber elements organized in linked 'diamond' congurations cor-
responding to non-orientated collagen ber secretion. The major axis orientation of the diamonds
is randomly chosen in [0; 2 ] with uniform probability. Moreover, we suppose that newly insemi-
nated bers can link with their neighbors when they intersect with a xed probability Pf, at the
time they are created. Note that these links are dynamical in time, due to the linking/unlinking
process (further described). Therefore, the diamond shape structures might be dissolved or persist
according to how fast the unlinking process is. Considering an initial ber network consisting of
bers longer than cell diameters is biologically plausible as collagen bers are produced before any
implantation of adipocytes.
Simultaneously with ber insemination, we suppose that the agents at the leading edge of
the wound create a ux of injury signaling chemicals. These signals are modeled as particles
created with the same rules as newly inseminated bers (described before), with space-dependent
insemination frequency R(X) having typical value 
R. They are supposed to have a nite lifetime:
injury signaling particles die according to a Poisson process of nite frequency D. These injury-
signaling particles are supposed to diuse through the ECM in a directed manner, the direction
being given by the mean local orientation of the brous tissue (comprised between  =2 and=2
as the ber elements are not directed). The dynamics of these signaling particles are described
4by a continuum model (shown in the Appendix), discretized using particles following a Smoothed-
Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) approach. The SPH method performs better than classical grid
methods in the presence of zero-density regions where traditional grid-based methods are likely
to generate unphysical negative densities which severly compromise the simulation. With SPH
methods, zero-density regions are simply devoid of particles. Here, the density of injury signalling
molecules is initially zero, and there remain large zero-density regions in the simulation domain
throughout the computation, which makes the choice of the SPH method a necessity. Following
[43], we suppose that the stem cells have a negligible impact on the mechanical equilibrium and
we do not incorporate them in the model. The dierentiation of a stem cell into an adipocyte
is modeled as the creation (or 'insemination') of a new adipocyte, of space-dependent frequency
a(X) having typical value 
a. All new adipocytes are inseminated with the same small radius. In
order to delay cell dierentiation during tissue reconstruction, new adipocytes are inseminated at
random times following a Poisson process the frequency of which depends on: (a) The density of
injury-signaling particles: New adipocytes appear more likely where the density of injury signaling
particle is low, (b) the number of ber links in the ECM: new adipocytes appear more likely in
regions of low ECM ber links and (c) the density of existing agents: new adipocytes appear more
likely where existing bers are already present. The dierentiation yield is modeled through the
regular growth of the cells. We assume that the volume of each adipocyte reaches a maximal value
beyond which it stays constant. Because adipocytes are lled with an incompressible liquid we
assume that two neighboring disks can not overlap.
(ii) Fiber-adipocyte interactions: We view the ECM as composed of bers having locally pre-
ferred directions. Each ber element exerts an elementary mechanical action corresponding to
a fraction of the action the ECM exerts on neighboring cells. It carries directional information
corresponding to the preferred direction of the collagen bers. The largest mechanical action of a
ber is exerted normally to this direction. The bers repel the cells by means of a soft potential
allowing some penetration of the cells inside the ECM. A ber element produces a unit of potential
strength. Larger mechanical actions are achieved by having several of these unit ber elements
in a close neighborhood. In practice, we assume that the ber-cell repulsion potential isolines are
ellipses with foci at the two ends of the ber segment and that the potential vanishes beyond a cer-
tain distance from the ber. The choice of elliptic isolines corresponds to the simplest anisotropic
shape in 2D.
(iii) Fiber growth, elongation and ability to bend: In addition to carrying a unit of ECM ber
strength, ber elements also carry a unit of ber length. However, ber elongation [8] is created
by allowing two crossing bers to create a cross-link. Any displacement of a cross-linked ber pair
maintains the position of the cross-link relative to the center of each ber. Several consecutively
cross-linked ber elements model a long ber having the ability to bend or even take possible
tortuous geometries. Pairs of cross-linked bers can also spontaneously unlink, allowing for ber
breakage describing ECM remodeling processes. Linking and unlinking processes follow Poisson
processes with frequencies `anddrespectively, and the parameter `=`
`+d, where2[0;1]
represents a measure of the fraction of linked bers among the pairs of intersecting bers. To model
the ability of long bers (those made of several cross-linked ber units) to oer a certain resistance
to bending, linked bers are subjected to a potential torque at their junction. This torque vanishes
when the bers are aligned, and consequently acts as a linked bers alignment mechanism. Any
force exerted by a cell in the vicinity of a cross-link would result in the cross-linked bers making
an obtuse angle with respect to one another until the exerted torque at the cross-link balances
the eect of the force, thereby providing a discrete representation of the bending of a continuous
beam. This torque is characterized by a parameter c1>0 playing the role of a exural modulus.
This parameter reects the linking forces as well as the number of links existing between bers.
The larger the c1the less elastic the ber assembly is. Finally, steric interactions among the bers
are considered by adding a ber-ber mechanical repulsion. Each ber element represents the
elementary mechanical action acting on neighboring bers. The bers repel each other by means
of a soft potential carrying directional information and the potential is stronger in the orthogonal
direction of the bers.
TheNAadipocytes are modeled as 2D spheres of center Xiand time dependent radius Ri
fori2[1; NA], and theNfECM ber elements are represented by straight lines of xed length
Lf, of centerYkand orientation angle kfork2[1; Nf]. We generate an injury that occurs at a
5chosen simulation time (in which the tissue is at mechanical equilibrium) and leads to the complete
destruction of half of the whole tissue. We delete all the elements (cells and bers) the centers of
which are contained in [  xmax
2;xmax
2][ ymax; ymax] where the 2D square simulation domain

 = [ xmax; xmax][ ymax; ymax]. The details of the model are presented in Appendix C.
2.3 Biological relevance of the model parameters
The reference time trefis chosen to be 0.05 times the cell growth time tg, i.e the time for which
a cell reaches its maximal radius. As it takes approximately 100 days for a nascent adipocyte to
grow to its maximal size and tg= 20 in our simulations, we can assume that trefis about 5 days
[5]. Simulations are stopped at dimensionless time t= 80tref. In the following, we consider three
ber unlinking times td=1
d:td=f10;100;1000gtref, and the linking time t`=`
1 `td(we use
`= 0:35 or 0.1). Note that these are linking/unlinking times per ber but the actual frequencies
of linking/unlinking events must be multiplied by the number of bers elements Nf. As in [46], we
can estimate that there is signicant ECM remodelling when at least 10% of the bers (i.e about
100 bers) have been linked or unlinked. Therefore, the ECM remodelling rate can be related to
100dand consequently, the ECM remodelling time td=100 ranges between 0 :1 and 10 days. In
[11], it is estimated that ECM remodelling takes about 15 days. Therefore we will refer to the
rst cases as 'highly dynamical tissues' and the last ones as 'regular tissues'. The choice of ber
length and width is motivated by studies of [57], where it is shown that the collagen bers are
organized into bundles of collagen brils the width of which varying from 1 to 20 mdepending
on tissues and organs. In order to enable the bers to bend around the cells, the ber elements
are chosen to be 20 mwide and 60 mlong (the adipocyte diameter being 60 m, see [46]). The
model parameters used for the simulations are given in table 1.
3 Results
The simulations are performed on a 2D square domain with periodic boundary conditions. Each
simulation starts from a tissue at equilibrium that we cut in half to mimic an injury. We consider
two types of tissues: (i) 'Regular tissues' with low remodelling rate, i.e with a low cross-linked
ber unlinking frequency d= 10 3and (ii) 'Highly dynamical tissues' with d= 10 1. Note that
the ECM remodelling parameters `;dand`are the same for computing the tissue homeostasis
phase before injury and for the reconstruction phase after injury. To obtain the tissue before injury,
we start the simulations with a ber network randomly distributed and randomly linked at 40%
(see table 1) and let the simulation run until reaching equilibrium (see [46]). The cell insemination
frequency parameter 
a, the injury signaling chemicals insemination rate 
Rand death rate 
D
and the sensitivity to the matrix local number of links for cell insemination are xed, and we study
the inuence of the ber insemination frequency parameter 
fand of the linking probability of
new bers Pfon the structures obtained after injury, for two dierent types of tissues (playing
on the dynamics of the tissue via the unlinking frequency d).
3.1 Regular tissues
In Fig.3 (I) (see also A.1), we show simulation results for `= 0:1 andd= 10 3at dierent
timest= 0:2tref,t= 0:4tref,t= 10tref,t= 20trefandt= 80tref, for low ber insemination rate
after injury 
f= 0:25 and moderate linking of new bers Pf= 0:2. As shown in Fig. 3, for slow
ber creation and moderate ber linking, lobule-like clusters of cells emerge in the reconstructed
zone, with similar features as before the injury and same number of adipocytes as before injury
(compare left and right images of Fig. 3).
In Fig. 3 (II) (see also A.2), we use the same initial condition, i.e with simulation parameters
`= 0:1,d= 10 3, but with dierent ECM reconstruction parameters: We consider a fast ber
insemination with rate 
f= 2 with large linking probability of new bers Pf= 0:5. In this case,
the injured zone is lled with a highly interconnected ber network possessing very few adipocytes,
structure which resembles a scar. These results show that the ber network reconstruction speed
and reconstructed ECM can trigger regeneration or scar formation in 'regular networks'. In the
next section, we study the case of highly dynamical networks.
6Figure 3: Left panel: Simulation results before injury for tissue with low ber remodelling rate:
`= 0:1,d= 10 3. Right panel: Reconstruction steps (I) We consider slow ber reconstruction
rate
f= 0:25 and moderate linking of new bers Pf= 0:2, (II) We consider fast ber reconstruc-
tion rate
f= 2 and large linking of new bers Pf= 0:5. From left to right: at time t= 0:2tref
(before injury), t= 0:4tref,t= 10tref,t= 20trefandt= 80tref.
Remark: Note that simulations of this section are performed for tissues with low remodelling
rated= 10 3, i.e each ber link has a large lifetime. For such slow remodelling network, the
total number of links is not proportional to `but rather close to the initial linking proportion, in
this case around 40% of crossed-bers. To compare this tissue with more dynamical ones, we will
use the value `= 0:35for tissues with larger d(see next section).
3.2 Highly dynamical tissues
In this section, we consider what is referred to as 'highly dynamical networks', i.e ber networks
with fast remodelling rate d= 10 1. In order to compare these tissues with the ones considered
in the previous section, we use the value `= 0:35 such that the two compared tissues have the
same proportion of links before injury (around 35% of crossed-bers are linked before injury).
In Fig. 4 (I) (see also A.3), we show simulations results for slow ber insemination rate after
injury
f= 0:25 and moderate linking probability of newly inseminated bers Pf= 0:2. After
injury, the tissue is regenerated in the sense that we observe the same structures as before injury
for this set of parameters.
Finally, coupling fast ECM reconstruction with large linking probability of newly inseminated
bers (
f= 2,Pf= 0:5) -shown in Fig.4 (II) (see also A.4)- leads to the emergence of a highly
interconnected and organized (aligned) ber network containing few adipocytes.
When comparing the two reconstructed tissues displayed in Fig.4 (II right) and in Fig. 3 (II,
right), one can note that highly dynamical networks (Fig. 4 II) do not enable the formation of a scar
even when considering fast creation of highly interconnected bers, contrary to the observations
in 'regular tissues' (Fig.3 II). This is due to the fact that highly dynamical tissues rapidly remodel
the ber network, thereby creating organized (aligned) ber structures. By rapidly creating and
suppressing new links, these networks have a larger plasticity than the 'regular tissues'. As stem
cell dierentiation is sensitive to the local number of links in the ECM network, this results in the
creation of new adipocytes in these tissues.
3.3 Parametric analysis of the model
In order to enable the quantitative comparison between the tissue states before and after injury,
we proceed as in [46] and we dene quantiers EandNCmeasuring the elongation and number of
7Figure 4: Left panel: Simulation results before injury for tissue with low ber remodelling rate:
`= 0:35,d= 1. Right panel: Reconstruction steps (I) We consider slow ber reconstruction rate

f= 0:25 and moderate linking of new bers Pf= 0:2, (II) We consider fast ber reconstruction
rate
f= 2 and large linking of new bers Pf= 0:5. From left to right: at time t= 0:2tref(before
injury),t= 0:4tref,t= 10tref,t= 20trefandt= 80tref.
cell clusters respectively, and Ameasuring the mean alignment of ber clusters (see C.4 for more
details on their computation). As we are interested in comparing the reconstructed tissue with the
state before injury (to identify cases of regeneration or scar formation), we dene the 'global error'
 as a weighted norm of the quantiers before and after injury:
 =s
 E
E02+ A
A02+ NC
NC02+ NE
NE02;
whereNEis the number of cells and  X=X80tref X0for all quantiers X. We choose E0= 0:6,
A0= 0:2,NC0= 10 andNE0= 0:2 for all simulations, which correspond to the values of the
dierence of the quantiers between a regular tissue and a scar. Thus dened, large values of 
indicate that the reconstructed tissue is far from its initial state (before injury), while small values
of  indicate that the nal structures resemble the ones before injury. As functions of the ECM
reconstruction parameters, we observe three dierent nal states: (i) Regeneration, i.e complete
reconstruction of the tissue after injury with the same number of adipocytes and formation of
lobule-like clusters of cells in the new network (low values of ), (ii) formation of an unstructured
tissue with the same number of cells as before injury, but which does not display any organization
of the cell and ber clusters and (iii) scar formation, where the injured zone is lled with highly
interconnected and disorganized bers with very few adipocytes (large values of ). In Fig. 5, we
show the values of the global error  as a function of the linking probability of newly inseminated
bers Pf, for three dierent ber insemination frequencies after injury: 
f= 0:25 (blue curve),

f= 1 (red curve) and 
f= 2 (green curve), and for 'regular tissues' i.e with `= 0:1 and
d= 10 3. Figs. 6 and 7 show the simulation results for `= 0:35 andd= 10 2(Fig. 6) and
d= 10 1(Fig. 7). As shown in Fig. 5, the regeneration phase (where  is low) is observed
forPf2[0:1;0:2] and better regeneration is obtained for a moderate ber insemination frequency

f= 1 compared to the cases 
f= 0:25 or
f= 2. Regeneration is therefore obtained with a
moderate ECM reconstruction speed and when the newly inseminated bers are suciently linked.
ForPf= 0 indeed, the new tissue after injury is unstructured, showing that the new ECM must
be suciently linked to enable tissue regeneration. However if the new ECM is too linked (large
values of Pf), we observe the formation of a structure like scar, i.e a brotic tissue composed
of highly interconnected ber structures with very few adipocytes. Indeed, for 'regular tissues'
with low remodelling rate d= 10 3, the initially highly interconnected ber network fails to
8BEFORE INJURY
SCAR FORMATION
REGENERATIONFigure 5: Values of the global error  as a function of the linking probability of newly inseminated
bers Pf, for dierent values of ber insemination rates after injury 
f:
f= 0:25 (blue curve),

f= 1 (red curve) and 
f= 2 (green curve), and for tissues with low remodelling rate `=
0:1;d= 10 3.
self-organize and prevent new cells to appear, generating a scar. Note that the ber insemination
rate after injury 
fhas little inuence on the global error  for small values of linking probability
of newly inseminated bers Pf, while for larger values of Pf, increasing the ber insemination
speed favors scar formation. The dependency of the scar formation on the ber insemination
speed is enhanced when considering more dynamical ber networks (Fig. 6). Indeed for larger
linking/unlinking frequency d= 10 2, the ber network is more able to organize even when
initially highly interconnected (for Pf= 0:5). When the ber insemination speed is low, the
ber structures can align and enable the apparition of new cells, preventing scar formation in
this case and generating an unstructured tissue. As shown in Fig. 6 for moderately dynamical
BEFORE INJURY
SCAR FORMATION
REGENERATION
Figure 6: Values of the global error  as function of the linking probability of newly inseminated
bers Pf, for dierent values of ber insemination rates after injury 
f:
f= 0:25 (blue curve),

f= 1 (red curve) and 
f= 2 (green curve), and for tissues with moderate remodelling rate
`= 0:35;d= 10 2.
9networksd= 10 2, no regeneration is obtained for large ber insemination speeds 
f= 1 or 2,
and regeneration is only obtained for 
f= 0:25 and Pf= 0:1. This shows that the reconstruction
of more plastic ber networks must be slower than for 'regular tissues' to enable regeneration to
occur. When considering highly dynamical networks ( d= 10 1, Fig. 7), one can note that scar
BEFORE INJURY
REGENERATION
UNSTRUCTURED
Figure 7: Values of the global error  as a function of the linking probability of newly inseminated
bers Pf, for dierent values of ber insemination rates after injury 
f:
f= 0:25 (blue curve),

f= 1 (red curve) and 
f= 2 (green curve), and for tissues with large remodelling rate `=
0:35;d= 10 1.
formation is not observed no matter the linking probability of newly inseminated bers Pfnor the
ber insemination speed 
f. In this case indeed, as the ber network remodelling is very fast, the
ber structures quickly self-organize and align, enabling the apparition of new cells. For slow ber
insemination, the state before injury is recovered independently of Pf(regeneration), while larger
ber insemination speed lead to the formation of unstructured tissues.
Finally, we show in Fig. 8 the same computations as in Figs. 5-7 but with injury signaling
particles lifetime increased by a factor 2 ( 
D= 1 instead of 
D= 0:5 as before). As we can observe,
we obtain the same results as before (compare Figs. 8 (A) - (C) to Figs. 5, 6, 7 respectively).
These results show that in the regime of parameters chosen here, the lifetime of the injury signaling
particles is not a key parameters in the fate of injury reconstruction. Note that the presence of
injury signaling particles -blocking cell dierentiation as long as they are present locally- together
with ber insemination are the only new model ingredients compared to the previous model for
AT morphogenesis. The model results suggest that if these new ingredients are essential to enable
tissue reconstruction after injury, they are not determinant in the choice of regeneration/scar
formation. The characteristics of the reconstructed tissues seem to mostly be determined by the
mechanical properties of the reconstructed ECM.
4 Discussion
In our previous study [43], we demonstrated that AT morphogenesis results from a self-organization
process principally driven by simple mechanical interactions between adipocytes and the ECM.
Using the same framework, this study represents a step forward into the understanding of the
mechanisms of AT repair after injury. The originality of our work lies in the hypothesis that the
same mechanisms as for AT morphogenesis could be at play in tissue reconstruction after injury.
Here, we showed that our mathematical model is either able to reproduce regenerated states or
formation of scars after injury, by simply varying few key parameters. As a comparison, the
main dierence between the morphogenesis model and the tissue repair one is that tissue injury
10𝛘l=0.1, ν d = 10-3𝛘l=0.35, ν d = 10-2
𝛘l=0.35, ν d = 0.1 (A)(B) (C)Figure 8: Values of the global error  as a function of the linking probability of newly inseminated
bers Pf, for dierent values of ber insemination rates after injury 
f:
f= 0:25 (blue curve),

f= 1 (red curve) and 
f= 2 (green curve), and for dierent tissues (low remodelling rate large
`= 0:1;d= 10 3(A), moderate remodelling rate `= 0:35;d= 10 2(B), low remodelling rate
`= 0:35;d= 10 1(C)), and for injury signaling death rate D= 1.
is represented as a gap in the tissue, whereas the tissue lled all the space in the morphogenesis
model. This means that new components (cells and bers) appear to ll the gap.
The states after injury that emerge from the mathematical model can be classied into three
types: (i) Regeneration, i.e. complete reconstruction of the tissue after injury with the same number
of adipocytes and formation of lobule-like clusters of cells in the new network, (ii) formation of
an unstructured tissue with the same number of cells as before injury, but which do not display
any organization of the cell and ber clusters and (iii) scar formation, where the injured zone
is lled with highly interconnected and disorganized bers with very few adipocytes. Each state
corresponds to a range of model parameters among which the rate of new ber insemination 
f
and the linking probability between bers at insemination Pfseem to play a crucial role (Figure
1,2,3,4). To weigh the relative roles of these two parameters in driving tissue regeneration or scar
formation, we ran our model in three dierent tissues exhibiting low, moderate or high remodeling
rates respectively (Figure 5,6,7). This remodeling rate correspond to the unlinking frequency d
for a xed fraction of linked bers `(the larger the unlinking frequency the larger the linking
frequency as `=`
1 `d). Regardless of the rate of new ber insemination, the outcome of
tissue repair is the same in a tissue exhibiting low ber linking-unlinking dynamic (enabling low
remodeling of ber structures). In such tissues, the key parameter driving tissue reconstruction is
the linking probability of new bers Pfas tissue regeneration is favored in a range of Pfcomprised
between 0.1 and 0.2 whereas, higher values of Pfare associated with scar formation. In tissues
exhibiting moderate or high remodeling capabilities, a large rate of new ber insemination decreases
tissue regeneration capabilities. Moreover, under conditions of low rate of new ber insemination,
regeneration can be obtained for a wider range of linking probabilities of newly inseminated bers
(Pfcomprised between 0.1 and 0.3) compared to tissues exhibiting low remodeling rates. For
higher ber insemination rates, we observe either the formation of an unstructured tissue or of a
scar. This observation is related to the fact that highly dynamical tissues exhibiting large plasticity
quickly remodel their ber network allowing the creation of organized (aligned) ber structures as
long as ber density is not too high. All these tissue features provide ECM physical properties
which control stem cell dierentiation through cell-matrix protein interactions. Thus, in our model,
a low ber insemination rate associated to a high plasticity of the ECM induce the creation of new
adipocytes in AT and facilitate tissue regeneration compared to tissues with lower remodeling rate.
Our model suggests that there exists a value of ECM link proportion at creation after injury
Pf= 0:1 for which the tissues regenerate, independently of other parameters (i.e independently
of the type of tissue -exhibiting low, moderate or high ECM remodelling abilities- or of the ber
insemination frequency 
f). On the other hand, the capability of a tissue to generate a scar is mul-
tifactorial. Indeed, scar formation was only observed for tissues with low or moderate remodelling
abilities and for which the proportion of ber links at creation is above a given threshold. This
threshold itself depends on the ber insemination rate and the type of tissue considered. Moreover,
11qualitatively, this study showed that the same model can be used to study tissue homeostasis or
induce regeneration. On the other hand, quantitatively, our work showed that tissue regeneration
is possible for specic values of the ECM link proportion at creation Pfwhich is lower than the
one corresponding to ECM of the homeostasis phase (before injury).
In conclusion, our results show that ECM reconstruction capabilities are key elements in the
fate of injury outcome, thereby highlighting the importance of the ECM and the mechanical forces
induced by it. They are consistent with recent papers demonstrating the impact of the ECM and
of its dysregulation (i.e. brosis/scar) on repair processes [20, 36, 44].
Further improvements of the model could be made. From a mathematical viewpoint, the
development of a macroscopic model from the present IBM would enable simulations on larger
domains and address the question of the organization of the whole tissue. A rst step has been made
in [13] where a macroscopic model for interacting bers has been derived. This macroscopic model
has been further analyzed and its derivation has been numerically validated in [46]. Moreover, the
model could also be extended to 3D without profound methodological modications (see discussion
in [46]). From a biological viewpoint, the development of a model including a time scale similar to
what is observed in vivo in mouse models of AT regeneration and scar healing should allow us to
dene a precise time window during which pharmacological treatments would act on ECM ber
linking and in ne drive tissue repair towards regeneration.
Acknowledgments
PD acknowledges support from the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC)
under grant ref. EP/M006883/1 and EP/N014529/1, from the Royal Society and the Wolfson
foundation through a Royal Society Wolfson Research Merit Award no. WM130048 and from
the National Science Foundation (NSF) under grant RNMS11-07444 (KI-Net). PD is on leave
from CNRS, Institut de Math ematiques, Toulouse, France. D.P. acknowledges support by the
Vienna Science and Technology Fund (WWTF) under project number LS13-029, and gratefully
acknowledges the Institut de Math ematiques de Toulouse (IMT) for sharing computing resources
enabling the present study.
Data statement
No new data were collected in the course of this research.
A Supplementary material: videos of numerical simulations
A.1 S1 Video
Simulation: Reconstruction of 'regular tissues' ( `= 0:1;d= 10 3) after injury, with
slow ber reconstruction rate and moderate linking of new bers . This video shows a
simulation of the reconstruction steps of a 'regular tissue' ( `= 0:1;d= 10 3), with slow ber
reconstruction rate and moderate linking of new bers after injury: 
f= 0:25 and Pf= 0:2.
Cells are represented as 2D spheres (red), the bers before injury in dark blue and new bers
in cyan, ber links are represented as green dots and injury signalling particles as magenta dots.
At timet= 1 the tissue at equilibrium is cut in half and we let the tissue reconstruct during
100tref(400 days). Left panel: Initial condition (tissue at homeostasis before injury). Center
panel: tissue reconstruction after injury (the injury zone is marked by white dashed lines). Right
panel: evolution in time of the global error  which measures the distance between the tissue
quantiers at time tand before injury (small values of  indicate a regeneration while large values
indicate scar formation). At equilibrium, the tissue is reconstructed with structures similar to the
ones before injury, showing that this set of parameters lead to regeneration for regular tissues.
12A.2 S2 Video
Simulation: Reconstruction of 'regular tissues' ( `= 0:1;d= 10 3) after injury, with
large ber reconstruction rate and large linking of new bers . This video shows a sim-
ulation of the reconstruction steps of a 'regular tissue' ( `= 0:1;d= 10 3), with large ber
reconstruction rate and large linking of new bers after injury: 
f= 2 and Pf= 0:5. Cells are
represented as 2D spheres (red), the bers before injury in dark blue and new bers in cyan, ber
links are represented as green dots and injury signalling particles as magenta dots. At time t= 1
the tissue at equilibrium is cut in half and we let the tissue reconstruct during 100 tref(400 days).
Left panel: Initial condition (tissue at homeostasis before injury). Center panel: tissue recon-
struction after injury (the injury zone is marked by white dashed lines). Right panel: evolution
in time of the global error  which measures the distance between the tissue quantiers at time
tand before injury (small values of  indicate a regeneration while large values indicate scar for-
mation). At equilibrium, the injury zone is lled with a highly connected ber network possessing
no adipocytes, which resemble a scar.
A.3 S3 Video
Simulation: Reconstruction of 'highly dynamical tissues' ( `= 0:35;d= 10 1) after
injury, with slow ber reconstruction rate and moderate linking of new bers . This
video shows a simulation of the reconstruction steps of a 'highly dynamical tissue' ( `= 0:35;d=
10 1), with slow ber reconstruction rate and moderate linking of new bers after injury: 
f= 0:25
andPf= 0:2. Cells are represented as 2D spheres (red), the bers before injury in dark blue
and new bers in cyan, ber links are represented as green dots and injury signalling particles
as magenta dots. At time t= 1 the tissue at equilibrium is cut in half and we let the tissue
reconstruct during 100 tref(400 days). Left panel: Initial condition (tissue at homeostasis before
injury). Center panel: tissue reconstruction after injury (the injury zone is marked by white dashed
lines). Right panel: evolution in time of the global error  which measures the distance between
the tissue quantiers at time tand before injury (small values of  indicate a regeneration while
large values indicate scar formation). At equilibrium, the tissue is reconstructed with structures
similar to the ones before injury, showing that this set of parameters lead to regeneration for highly
dynamical tissues.
A.4 S4 Video
Simulation: Reconstruction of 'highly dynamical tissues' ( `= 0:35;d= 10 1) after
injury, with large ber reconstruction rate and large linking of new bers . This video
shows a simulation of the reconstruction steps of a 'highly dynamical tissue' ( `= 0:35;d= 10 1),
with large ber reconstruction rate and large linking of new bers after injury: 
f= 2 and Pf= 0:5.
Cells are represented as 2D spheres (red), the bers before injury in dark blue and new bers in
cyan, ber links are represented as green dots and injury signalling particles as magenta dots. At
timet= 1 the tissue at equilibrium is cut in half and we let the tissue reconstruct during 100 tref
(400 days). Left panel: Initial condition (tissue at homeostasis before injury). Center panel:
tissue reconstruction after injury (the injury zone is marked by white dashed lines). Right panel:
evolution in time of the global error  which measures the distance between the tissue quantiers
at timetand before injury (small values of  indicate a regeneration while large values indicate
scar formation). Contrary to 'regular tissues' (see Video A.2), scar formation is not observed for
highly dynamical tissues. By rapidly creating and suppressing new links, ECM networks of highly
dynamical tissues have a larger plasticity than the 'regular tissues', enabling new adipocytes to
appear.
B Immunouorescence and biphoton microscopy.
Mouse inguinal adipose tissues (AT) were xed, embedded in agarose gel and cut into 300 m
slices. Slices were incubated in Bodipy in PBS/0 :2% triton 2h at room temperature. Imaging was
13performed using a Biphotonic Laser Scanning microscope (LSM880 Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany)
with an objective lens LCI 'Plan Apochromat' 10x/0.45 and excited using 561 and 800 nm lasers.
C Details of the components of the model
In this section, we detail the model ingredients for the simulations shown in the main text, and we
refer to [46] for more details. The two-dimensional Individual Based Model (IBM) consists of NA
adipocytes, which are modelled as 2D growing spheres of center Xiand radius Riforiin [1;NA],
andNfextra-cellular-matrix ber elements which are represented by straight segments of xed
lengthLf, of centerYkand orientation angle kfork2[1;Nf]. Adipocytes are prevented to overlap
to model volume exclusion between cells. Fiber elements have the ability to link to or unlink from
each other to model ber elongation or rupture. The resistance of bers to growing adipocytes
is modelled by a repulsion potential Wpotbetween cells and bers, and bers are supposed to
repel each other by the same potential. Additionally, bers oer resistance to bending through an
alignment potential Walacting between two linked ber elements. Cells and bers seek to minimize
their mechanical interaction energy resulting from these potentials, subject to the non-overlapping
constraint between cells and to the linkage constraint between linked bers. In the course of the
simulation, an injury occurs, new cross-linked bers are inseminated, new adipocytes appear as a
result of stem-cell dierentiation, adipocytes grow, new ber links can appear and existing links
can disappear. These phenomena disrupt the mechanical equilibrium and force the cells and bers
to move in order to restore the equilibrium.
C.1 Mechanical potential
Given a conguration at a xed time, we denote by Cthe set of cell center positions and radii:
C=f(Xi;Ri); i2[1;NA]gand byFthe set of ber center positions and ber directional angles:
F=f(Yk;k); k2[1;Nf]g. The global mechanical energy of the system reads:
W(C;F) =Wpot(C;F) +Wal(F); (1)
whereWpotcontains the ber-cell and ber-ber repulsion potentials, and Walis the linked ber-
ber alignment potential:
Wpot(C;F) =X
1iNAX
1kNfW(Xi;Yk;k;d0;i;~Wk) +X
1fNfX
1kNfW(Yk;Yf;f;2d0;~W)
+W(Yf;Yk;k;2d0;~W)
(2)
Wal(F) =c1X
1kNfX
1mNfpt
kmsin2(k m): (3)
The time-dependent coecients pt
kmare set to 1 if bers kandmare linked at time tand to 0
otherwise. The alignment potential Walof intensity c1consists of the sum of elementary alignment
potentials between bers of a linked pair. The repulsion potential Wpotis supposed to be the sum
of two-particle potential elements, W(Xi;Yk;k;d0;i;~Wk), modeling the mechanical interaction
between cell iand berk, and the sum of two-ber potential elements W(Yf;Yk;k;2d0;~W),
modeling the mechanical interaction between ber kand berf. The isolines of these potential
elements consist of ellipses with foci located at the two ends of the ber segment corresponding
to the second and third variables of the functional W. Given two vectors X,Y2R2, an angle
2[ 
2;
2], a distance d0and an intensity ~W,W(X;Y;;d 0;~W) reads:
W(X;Y;;d 0;~W) =(~W
g(d0) 
g(d0) d(X;Y; )
ifd(X;Y; )g(d0)
0 otherwise(4)
where:
d(X;Y; ) =jX Y+Lf
2!()j+jX Y Lf
2!()j;
14Fiber fd0Xfd
0    +RiRiCell i
Xf
2d0
XkFiber f
Fiber k
Repulsion zone sensed by cell i center eﬀective size of ﬁbersRepulsion zone sensed by ﬁber k center(A) (B)Figure 9: Scheme of the repulsion potential exerted by ber fon (A) cell i, with orthogonal
distanced0+Rifrom berfcenter to cell icenter and (B) ber k, orthogonal distance 2 d0from
berfcenter to ber kcenter. The isolines of the ber frepulsion potential are indicated in
color and the eective size of bers (inside which no overlapping occurs with any other part of the
neighboring agents) is indicated in red dashed lines.
and!() =cos
sin
is the unit vector associated to the ber angle . We suppose that ber kcan
repel celliand berfup to a distance d0in its orthogonal direction. Note that ber-cell repulsion
(resp. ber-ber repulsion) aims to model repulsion of the ber by the border of the cell (resp. by
the border of the other ber), while a cell (resp. a ber) is modeled by its center. The repulsion
distance is accordingly chosen to d0;i=d0+Rifor a cell and to 2 d0for a ber (see Fig. 9). A
direct computation gives:
g(d0) = 2s
L2
f
4+d2
0:(5)
Finally, we let the strength of each cell-ber repulsion potential element ~Wkdepend on the local
alignment of the ber network [20]. To this aim, we let ~Wkbe a function comprised between W0
andW1, equal toW0when the local alignment around ber kis weak and W1when it is strong
(see [46] for more details).
At each time step, the minimization of the global mechanical energy under the constraints
reads:
(C;F) = argmin
(~C)0;	(~F)=0W(~C;~F); (6)
where ( ~C)0 expresses cell-cell non-overlapping inequality constraints (iii) and 	( ~F) = 0
expresses ber-ber linkage equality constraints (v) (further detailed), where:
(C) = 
ij(Xi;Xj)
(i;j)2[1;NA]2;
	(F) = ~	km(Yk;Ym;k;m)
(k;m)2Nf:
Here,Nfdenotes the dynamical set of linked ber pairs: Nf=f(k;m)2[1;Nf]2; k <m; pt
km=
1g.
C.2 Constraints
The non overlapping constraint between cells iandjis written as an inequality constraint on the
following function  ij:
ij(Xi;Xj) = (Ri+Rj)2 jXi Xjj2: (7)
One immediately notes that cells iandjdo not overlap if and only if  ij(Xi;Xj)0.
To model ber growth and elongation or conversely rupture, unlinked (resp. linked) intersecting
bers have the possibility to link (resp. unlink) at random times. As long as a pair of linked bers
15remains linked, the attachment sites of the two linked bres are kept at the same point. The
maitenance of the link between bers kandmis modeled as an equality constraint ~	km= 0 with:
~	km(Yk;Ym;k;m) =Yk+`km!(k) Ym `mk!(m); (8)
where`kmis the distance of the center of ber kto its attachment site with ber m(see [46] for
more details).
C.3 Biological Phenomena
In this section, we give details on the treatment of the biological phenomena of the model (cell and
ber insemination and insemination of injury signaling chemicals after injury). The insemination
locations of new agents (cells and bers) are supposed to depend on some local densities of existing
agents at the time of their creation: bers and injury signaling chemicals are created at the -moving-
edges of the tissue, and cells are inseminated in an existing ECM which is not too linked locally.
To this aim, we rst describe how we compute the densities of existing agents at a given time of
the simulation, and then describe the treatment of each biological phenomenon.
Computation of the agent density The agent density (cells and bers) around the geometri-
cal pointX2
 is computed thanks to a Particle-In-Cell (PIC) method. It indicates the number of
agents per unit volume. To compute it, the computational domain 
 is rst discretized into Nx+1
(respNy+ 1) nodes in the x-direction (resp. y-direction) regularly distributed with distance  x
(resp. y) from their neighbors, with N
= 4NxNynumber of numerical boxes for the PIC method.
Then, the contribution of each agent i(cell or ber) located at ( xi;yi) is distributed among the
nodes surrounding ( xi;yi) such as in Fig. 10. Denoting ( x1;y1);(x2;y2);(x3;y3);(x4;y4) the four
Figure 10: Distribution of agent icenter (in gray) among the surrounding nodes
(x1;y1);(x2;y2);(x3;y3);(x4;y4). The weights of each node corresponds to the area with matching
color.
nodes (from the below left corner and numbered in trigonometric order) around ( xi;yi),(xk;yk)
fork= 1:::4 is computed with:
(xk;yk) =X
ij(xi;yi)2[x1;x2][y1;y2]ci
(xy)2!k(xi;yi);
where the weights !kfork= 1:::4 read:
!1(xi;yi) = (x3 xi)(y3 yi)
!2(xi;yi) = (xi x4)(y4 yi)
!3(xi;yi) = (xi x1)(yi y1)
!4(xi;yi) = (x2 xi)(yi y2):
16andciis the agent-type dependent weight. As the maximal cell area is chosen to R2
max1:4 and
the eective size of an individual ber is set to Lf
2d0
20:36Ac
5(see Fig. 9), it is reasonable to
consider that a cell occupies 5 times more space than an individual ber. We therefore choose the
weightci= 1 for a cell i,ci=1
5for a beri. The agent density biased by the local amount of linked
bers`(used for dening the cell insemination frequency a(X) of section 'Cell insemination') is
computed in the same way, but letting the weight ci=Ni;`
5for a beri, whereNi;`is the number
of bers linked to ber i. Note that if ber iis not linked to any other ber, ci= 0, and therefore
the unlinked bers do not contribute to the biased density of agents `.
The gradient of is computed using nite dierences on the numerical grid used for the PIC
method (previously described). On the left boundary of the wound we use a forward second order
nite dierence scheme: @
@x
i 3i+ 4i+1 i+2
2x;
while for the right boundary we use a backward nite dierence scheme:
@
@x
i3i 4i 1+i 2
2x;
and nally in the center we use centered nite dierences:
@
@x
ii+1 i 1
2x:
Fiber insemination We suppose that ber insemination follows a Poisson process in time,
of spatially dependent frequency f(X)2[0;
f],X2
. In order to let the ber insemination
frequency depend on the local agent (cells of bers) density as well as on the local agent density
gradient length g(;r), inspired from [1], we set:
f(X) =
f L0
cg 
(X);r(X)
 1
hs
 1 (X)
s
hs
;
where
f;L0
c;hs;sare real positive model parameters, (X) is the agents density around point X
(further described) and
 (z) =1
2(1 + tanh(z)) (smoothing function)
g(;r) =jjrjj
+0(inverse of gradient length) :
Here,0is introduced to avoid singularities of the function g(;r) in cases where the local agents
densityis close to 0. The increasing smoothing function  (z
hs)2[0;1] allows to control the
dependency of the frequencies of the Poisson processes on the quantities contained in the variable
z, with scaling control hs(see Fig. 11). Thus dened, ber insemination will occur more likely
in zones of high agent gradient (close to the boundaries of the wound) and with low local agent
density. The Poisson process is discretized as follows: we randomly pick up N
points in the
computational domain 
 and, for each point, we compute the value f(X) and inseminate a ber
the center of which is at Xwith probability 1  exp f(X)St, whereS=j
j
N
. Note that N
is the
number of numerical boxes used to compute the agent density with the PIC method (explained
further).
Injury signaling chemicals As for the bers, we suppose that a ux of injury signaling
chemicals (of density R) is created at the boundaries of the wound. We therefore inseminate
these injury signaling chemicals following a Poisson process in time, of spatially dependent density
R(X),X2
:
R(X) =
R L0
cg 
(X);r(X)
 1
hs
 1 (X)
s
hs
;
where
R>0 is a parameter of the model. The Poisson process of frequency R(X) is discretized
as for the ber insemination (see previous paragraph). We suppose that injury signaling particles
17Figure 11: Function  (z
hs) as a function of z2[0;1], for dierent values of hs:hs= 0:01 (blue
curve),hs= 0:1 (orange curve), hs= 0:5 (yellow curve) and hs= 1 (purple curve).
have a lifetime1
D. Hence, the probability of suppressing an injury signalling particle between time
stepstandt+ tis 1 e Dt. Once created, these injury signaling particles are supposed to
diuse in the brous network in a directed manner, i.e the ux speed at location Xis supposed to
be biased by the mean orientation of bers around point X. The time evolution of the density of
injury signalling particles then reads:
@tR=r: 
RD(X)rR
R+
R
(9)
where
R>0 is a parameter introduced to avoid singularities where R= 0 andDis a 22
diusion matrix of the tissue around point X. In order to let injury signalling particles diuse
locally in a directed manner throughout the surrounding tissue, we let the diusion matrix be the
sum of the projection matrices on the direction vectors of the bers contained in the ball centered
inXand of radiusLf
4:
D(X) =d0X
fjjjYf XjjLf
4!f
!f;
whered0>0 is the diusion parameter and !f=cosf
sinf
is the directional vector of ber f. We
consider Neumann boundary conditions on the right and left boundaries and periodic boundary
conditions on the top and bottom. For any y2[ ymax;ymax]:
@R
@x(x= xmax;y) = 0;@R
@x(x=xmax;y) = 0:
In order to compute the uxes, we use a Smooth Particle Hydrodynamic approach [39], enabling
the modelling of uid elements as discrete objects. To this aim, let us denote by Zthe coordinate
vector of an injury signalling particle. The Lagrangian description of the uid following Eq. (9)
then reads:dZ
dt= D(X)rR
R+
R: (10)
Given a function f(X),X2
 we have:
f(X) =Z

f(X0)(X X0)dX0:
At the discrete level, replacing the delta function by a smoothing kernel W(X;h) with characteristic
widthhsuch that:
lim
h!0W(X;h) =(X);
subject to the normalization Z

W(X0;h)dX0= 1;
18we have:
f(X) =Z

f(X0)
R(X0)W(X X0;h)R(X0)dX0+O(h2):
After discretizing the continuous eld in a series of NparticlesZjof massmj,f(X) can be written:
f(X)NX
j=1mj
jf(Zj)W(X Zj;h);
and where jR(Zj) andmj
jis the volume of a discrete particle j. The interpolated gradient
of function fthen reads:
rf(X) =NX
j=1mj
jf(Zj)rW(X Zj;h):
In our model, we use the poly6 kernel dened in 2D by:
W(X;h) =(
4
h8(h2 jjXjj2)3if 0jjXjjh
0 otherwise ;
the gradient of which reads:
rW(X;h) =(
 24
h8(h2 jjXjj2)2X if 0jjXjjh
0 otherwise :
The support radius his chosen such that the region of inuence of each particle contains 10 to 20
neighbouring particles. Equation (10) for each particle ( Zj;mj)2
R;j2[1;N] then reads:
dZj
dt= DjrR(Zj)
j+
R;
whereDj=D(Zj) and
rR(Zj) =NX
k=1mkrW(Zj Zk;h):
We consider an explicit time discretization: for tn= t1+:::+ tn, we write for every j2[1;N]:
Zn+1
j=Zn
j tnDn
jrR(Zn
j)
n
j+
R;
where tnis time-dependent and respects the CFL condition:
tnCh
sup
j2[1;N]jjDn
jrR(Zn
j)
n
j+
Rjj;
withC1
2.
Cell insemination Cell insemination is supposed to follow a Poisson process in time of space
dependent frequency a(X). In order to let cell insemination occur at locations where there is a
low density of injury signaling particles R, enough agents (cells or bers) but not too much cells
and linked bers `, we dene:
a(X) =
a  1 2`(X)
s
hs
  1 2R(X)
s
hs
  2(X)
s 1
hs
where
a>0 is a model parameter, and `(X) is the density of agents biased by the local amount
of linked bers, computed as explained in the next section. New cells are inseminated with a small
radiusRi= 0:1.
19Cell growth After insemination, the volumes of the cells are supposed to grow linearly with
time. Given a cell iat timet, the radius of cell iat timet+ treads:
R3
i(t+ t) =R3
i(t) +Kg(1 +g)
whereis a random number chosen uniformly in [0 ;1] andKg,gare two parameters such thatKg
t
is the mean volumetric cell growth per unit of time andKgg
tis related to the standard deviation
of the volumetric cell growth per unit of time. The characteristic time of cell growth tgis dened
as the mean time needed for a cell to reach its maximal radius Rmaxand reads:
tg=R3
maxt
Kg:
C.4 Statistical quantiers
This section is devoted to the computation of statistical quantiers used to describe cell and ber
structures in both numerical simulations and biological images. A cell cluster is dened as a set of
cells almost in contact. Let abe the reexive and symmetric relation:
jai,j2Ni;
whereNiis the set of cell ineighbors:
Ni=fj2[1;Na];j6=i;jjXi Xjj(Ri+Rj+a)2g; (11)
whereais the maximal allowed distance up to which two cells not in contact are dened as
neighbors and is set to 50% max( Ri;Rj). The equivalence relation Athen reads:
jAi,9n2N;9(a1::an)
such thatjaa1a:::aanai:
Cellsiandjbelong to the same cluster if and only if iAj.
The statistical quantier NCis dened as the total number of cell clusters which have more
than 5 adipocytes per 100 adipocytes.
The statistical quantier Emeasures the mean elongation of the cell clusters, and is dened
as the number of cells at the boundary of the clusters normalized by the total number of cells in
the clusters. As the parameter Eis irrelevant for clusters with less than 5 cells, its computation is
restricted for clusters csuch thatnc>5 and reads:
E=PNC
c=1Card(R\Cc)
PNC
c=1nc:
Here,Ccis the set of indices of the cells belonging to cluster c,ncis the number of cells in cluster
candRis the set of indices of all cells with less than 5 neighbors:
R=fi2[1;NA];Card(Ni)5g;
whereNiis dened by Eq. (11).
In order to describe the ber structures, we dene a ber cluster as a set of neighboring quasi-
aligned ber elements. For this purpose, let us dene Mkas the set of neighbors of ber k,
quasi-aligned with ber k. Then:
Mk=fm2[1;Nf];m6=k;
min(df(Yk;Ym);df(Ym;Yk))0
andjsin(k m)j<sin(
4)g;
wheredf(Yk;Ym) reads:
df(Yk;Ym) =d(Yk;Y 
m) +d(Yk;Y+
m) 2r
(Lf
2)2+ (fLf)2:
20Here,Y
m=YmLf
2!mandd(X;Y ) is the distance of point Xto pointY. Note that df(Yk;Ym)
0 (resp.df(Ym;Yk)0) if the center of ber k(resp.m) is contained in the ellipse of foci Y
m
(resp.Y
k) with semi minor axis of length fLfand semi major axis of lengthq
(Lf
2)2+ (fLf)2.
We chosef=1
3, which means that a ber detects a neighboring ber up to a distanceLf
3in its
orthogonal direction. This allows us to dene ber clusters as sets of quasi-aligned neighboring
bers. Let us dene the reexive and symmetric relation fby:
kfm,m2Mk:
Dene the equivalence relation Fsuch that:
kFm,9n2N;9(a1::an)
such thatkfa1f:::fanfm:
Then, we say that bers kandmbelong to the same cluster if and only if mFk.
We dene the SQ Ato quantify the mean alignment of the bers of a cluster. Given a ber
clustercf, the mean alignment of its bers is dened as the maximal eigenvalue +
cfof the mean
projection matrix on the direction vectors all bers of cluster cf:
Pf=1
nfX
m2cf!m
!m;
wherenfdenotes the number of bers contained in the cluster cf, and!mis the directional vector
of berm. Then,Ais dened as the mean of the ber cluster alignment, weighted by the number
of bers in the cluster:
A=1
NFX
1cfNTf+
cfncf;
wherencfis the number of bers in cluster cf.
C.5 Parameters of the model
If not otherwise stated, the model parameters used in the simulations are given by table 1
21Parameters Numerical Value Biological value Description
Model parameters
Agents
Na 190 N/A Number of cells before injury
Rmax 0.66 30 m Maximal cell radius
Nf 1600 N/A Number of bers before injury
Lf 1.2 60 m Fiber length
Mechanical Interactions
d0 0.4 20 m Fiber width
W0 10 N/A Minimal cell-ber repulsion force
W1 15 N/A Maximal cell-ber repulsion force
~W 5 N/A Fiber-ber repulsion force
Biological phenomena

f adapted between Fiber insemination frequency
Pf adapted N/A New ber linking probability

R 20 4 days 1Injury signalling particle insemination frequency

D 0.5 0.1 days 1Injury signalling particle suppression frequency

a 0.2 0.04 days 1Cell insemination frequency
Numerical parameters
j
j 1300 2.6 mm2Area of the square domain
N
 1444 N/A Number of numerical boxes for the PIC method
h L f=3 N/A Radius for the SPH method
L0
c 0.6 N/A Critical gradient length
s .5 N/A Critical agent density
hs .1 N/A Length of the distribution  
Table 1: Numerical and model parameters of the simulations of the main text.
References
[1] Aceves-Sanchez P, Aymard B, Peurichard D, Plourabou e F, Kennel P, Lorsignol A, Casteilla
L, Degond P (2018) A new model for the emergence of blood capillary networks, submitted.
[2] Ailhaud G (1999) Cross talk between adipocytes and their precursors: relationships with
adipose tissue development and blood pressure. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 892:127-135.
[3] Alonso R, Young J, Cheng Y (2014) A particle interaction model for the simulation of biological
and cross-linked bres inspired from ocking theory. Cellular and molecular bioengenering
7(1):58-72.
[4] Ambrosi D, Bussolino F, Preziosi L (2005) A review of vasculogenesis models. Journal of
Theoretical Medecine 6(1):1-19.
[5] Arner E, et al. (2010) Adipocyte turnover: relevance to human adipose tissue morphology.
Diabetes 59(1):105-109.
[6] Buske P, et al. (2012) On the biomechanics of stem cell niche formation in the gut - modelling
growing organoids, FEBS J. , 279:3475-3487.
[7] Casadai A, et al. (2012) Adipose tissue regeneration: a state of the art, J. Biomed. Biotech.
vol. 2012, Article ID 462543, 12 pages, 2012. doi:10.1155/2012/462543
[8] Chen C-Y, Byrne H-M, King J-R (2001) The inuence of growth induced stress from the
surrounding medium on the development of multicell spheroids. J. Math. Biol. 43:191-220.
[9] Ciarletta P, Ben Amar M (2009) A nite dissipative theory of temporary interllar bridges in
the extra-cellular matrix of ligaments and tendons. J. Roy. Soc. Interface 6(39):909-924.
22[10] Corvera S, Gealekman O (2014) Adipose tissue angiogenesis: impact on obesity and type-2
diabetes. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1842(3):463-72.
[11] Cowin SC (2004) Tissue growth and remodelling. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 6:77-107.
[12] Crisan M, Yap S, Casteilla L, Chen CW, Corselli M, Park TS, Andriolo G, Sun B, Zheng
B, Zhang L, Norotte C, Teng PN, Traas J, Schugar R, Deasy BM, Badylak S, Buhring HJ,
Giacobino JP, Lazzari L, Huard J, P eault B (2008) A perivascular origin for mesenchymal
stem cells in multiple human organs. Cell Stem Cell 3:301-313.
[13] Cristancho A-G, Lazar M-A (2011) Forming functional fat: a growing understanding of
adipocyte dierentiation. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 11:722-34.
[14] Degond P, Delebecque F, Peurichard D (2015) Continuum model for linked bers with align-
ment interactions. Math. Models Methods Appl. Sci. 26:269-318.
[15] Dickinson R-B (2000) A generalized transport model for biased cell migration in an anisotropic
environment. J. Math. Biol. 40:97-135.
[16] Divoux A, Clement K (2011) Architecture and the extracellular matrix: the still unappreciated
components of the adipose tissue. Obes. Rev. 12:494-503.
[17] Drasdo D (2003) On Selected Individual-based Approaches to the Dynamics in Multicellu-
lar Systems. Multiscale modelling and Numerical Simulations , eds W. Alt, M. Chaplain, M.
Griebel, J. Lenz (Birkh auser, Basel, Switzerland), pp 109-203.
[18] Drasdo D, H ohme S (2005) A single cell based-model of tumor growth in-vitro: monolayers
and spheroids. Phys. Biol. 2(3):135-47.
[19] Francis M E, Uriel S, Brey E M (2008) Endothelial cellmatrix interactions in neovasculariza-
tion. Tissue Engineering Part B: Reviews 14(1):19-32. doi:10.1089/teb.2007.0115.
[20] Friedl P, Br ocker E-B (2000) The biology of cell locomotion within three dimensional extra-
cellular matrix. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 57(1):41-64
[21] Friedl P, Hegerfeldt Y, Tusch M (2004) Collective cell migration in morphogenesis and cancer.
Int. J. Dev. Biol. 48:441-449.
[22] Fu X, Fang L, Li H, Li X, Cheng B, Sheng Z. (2007) Adipose tissue extract enhances skin
wound healing. Wound Repair Regen. 15(4):540-8.
[23] Galanis J , Nossala R, Harries D (2010) Depletion forces drive polymer-like self-assembly in
vibrouidized granular materials. Soft Matter 6:1026-1034.
[24] Galle J, Homann M, Aust G (2009) From single cells to tissue architecture: a bottom-up
approach to modelling the spatio-temporal organization of complex multicellular systems. J.
Math. Biol. 58(1-2):261-83.
[25] Guido S, Tranquillo R-T (1993) A methodology for the systematic and quantitative study
of cell contact guidance in oriented collagen gels correlation of broblast orientation and gel
birefringence. J. Cell Sci. 105:317-351.
[26] Hemmingsen M, et al. (2013) The role of paracrine and autocrine signaling in the early phase
of adipogenic dierentiation of adipose-derived stem cells. PloS One 8(5):e63638.
[27] Hillen T (2006) Mesoscopic and macroscopic models for mesenchymal motion. J. Math. Biol.
53(4):585-616.
[28] Hillen T, Hinow P, Wang Z-A (2010) Mathematical analysis of a kinetic model for cell move-
ment in network tissues. Discrete Contin. Dyn. Syst. 14(3):1055-1080.
[29] Hosek M, Tang J.X (2004) Polymer-induced bundling of F actin and the depletion force. Phys.
Rev. E 69:051907.
23[30] Hwang M, Garbey M, Berceli S-A, Tran-Son-Tay R (2009) Rule-Based Simulation of Multi-
Cellular Biological Systems-A Review of modelling Techniques, Cell Mol. Bioeng. 2(3):285-294.
[31] Javierre E, Vermolen F J, Vuik C, van der Zwaag S (2009) Mathematical analysis of physiologi-
cal and morphological aspects of wound closure, J. Math. Biol. 59:605630 DOI 10.1007/s00285-
008-0242-7
[32] Joanny J-F, J ulicher F, Kruse K, Prost J (2007) Hydrodynamic theory for multicomponent
active polar gels. New J. Phys. 9:422.
[33] Jungblut S., Tuinier R., Binder K. and Schilling T (2007) Depletion induced isotropic-isotropic
phase separation in suspensions of rod-like colloids. J. Chem. Phys. 127:244909.
[34] Karagianni M, Schulze T J, Bieback K (2012) Towards Clinical Application of Mesenchy-
mal Stromal Cells: Perspectives and Requirements for Orthopaedic Applications, chapter in
Tissue Regeneration - From Basic Biology to Clinical Application Edited by Jamie Davies,
ISBN 978-953-51-0387-5, 520 pages, Publisher: InTech, Chapters published March 30, DOI:
10.5772/1354
[35] Kershaw E. E, Flier J.S (2004) Adipose Tissue as an Endocrine Organ, J. Clin. Endocrinol.
Metab. , 89(6):2548-2556.
[36] Khan T, Muise ES, Iyengar P, Wang ZV, Chandalia M, Abate N, Zhang BB, Bonaldo P, Chua
S, Scherer PE (2009) Metabolic dysregulation and adipose tissue brosis: role of collagen VI.
Mol. Cell Biol. 29:1575-1591.
[37] Lushnikov P-M, Chen N, , Alber M (2008) Macroscopic dynamics of biological cells interacting
via chemotaxis and direct contact. Phys. Rev. E 78:061904
[38] Monsarrat P et al (2016)An Innovative, Comprehensive Mapping and Multiscale Analysis of
Registered Trials for Stem Cell-Based Regenerative Medicine, Stem Cells Transl. Med. 6:826-
35.
[39] J.J. Monaghan (1988) An introduction to SPH, Comput. Phys. Commun. , vol. 48, pp. 88-96,
1988
[40] Murray J-D, Oster G-F, Harris A-K (1983) A mechanical model for mesenchymal morpho-
genesis. J. Math. Biol. 17:125-129.
[41] Nambu M, et al (2009) Accelerated wound healing in healing-impaired db/db mice by autol-
ogous adipose tissue-derived stromal cells combined with atelocollagen matrix. Ann. Plast.
Surg. 62(3):317-21. doi: 10.1097/SAP.0b013e31817f01b6.
[42] Napolitano L (1963) The dierentiation of white adipose cells: an electron microscope study.
J. Cell Biol. 18:663-679.
[43] Ouchi N, Parker J-L, Lugus J-J and Walsh K (2011), Adipokines in inammation and
metabolic disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11:85-97.
[44] Pellegrinelli V, Heuvingh J, du Roure O, Rouault C, Devulder A, Klein C, Lacasa M, Cl ement
E, Lacasa D, Cl ement K (2014) Human adipocyte function is impacted by mechanical cues.
J. Pathol. 235:183-95.
[45] Peurichard D (2016) Macroscopic model for cross-linked bers with alignment interactions:
existence theory and numerical simulations. Multiscale Model. Simul. 14(4):1175-1210.
[46] D. Peurichard, F. Delebecque, A. Lorsignol, C. Barreau, J. Rouquette , X. Descombes, L.
Casteilla and P. Degond, Simple mechanical cues could explain adipose tissue morphology, J.
Theoret. Biol. 429:61-81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2017.06.030
[47] Preibisch S, Saalfeld S, Tomancak P (2009) Globally optimal stitching of tiled 3d microscopic
image acquisitions. Bioinformatics 25(11):1463-1465.
24[48] Rodriguez E-K, Hoger A, McCulloch A-D (1994) Stress-dependent nite growth in soft elastic
tissues. J. Biomech. 27(4):455-467.
[49] Sbarbati A, Accorsi D, Benati D, Marchetti L, Orsini G, Rigotti G, Panettiere P (2010)
Subcutaneous adipose tissue classication. Eur. J. Histochem. 54:e48.
[50] Sepe A, Tchkonia T, Thomou T, Zamboni M, Kirkland J-L (2011) Aging and regional dier-
ences in fat cell progenitors - a mini-review. Gerontology 57(1):66-75.
[51] Seretis K, Goulis D.G, Koliakos G, Demiri E (2015)The eects of abdominal lipectomy in
metabolic syndrome components and insulin sensitivity in females: a systematic review and
meta-analysis, Metabolism 12: 1640-49.
[52] Shoham N, et al. (2014) Adipocyte stiness increases with accumulation of lipid droplets.
Biophys. J. 106(6):1421-31.
[53] Shraiman B-I (2005) Mechanical feedback as a possible regulator of tissue growth. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 102(9):3518-3523.
[54] Sun K, Tordjman J, Clement K, Scherer PE (2013) Fibrosis and adipose tissue dysfunction.
Cell Metab. 18(4):470-477.
[55] Taber L-A, Shi Y, Yang L, Bayly P-V (2011) A poroelastic model for cell crawling including
mechanical coupling between cytoskeletal contraction and actin polymerization. J. Mech. Mat.
Struct. 6:569-589.
[56] Tang W, Zeve D, Suh JM, Bosnakovski D, Kyba M, Hammer RE, Tallquist MD, Gra JM
(2008) White fat progenitor cells reside in the adipose vasculature. Science 322:583-586.
[57] Ushiki T (2002), Collagen bers, reticular bers and elastic bers. A comprehensive under-
standing from a morphological viewpoint. Arch. Histol. Cytol. 65(2):109-126.
[58] Arrow KJ, Hurwicz L, Uzawa H (1958) Studies in linear and nonlinear programming, Stanford
University Press.
[59] Vermolen F, van RijnChapter O (2012) A Mathematical Model for Wound Contraction and
Angiogenesis, chapter in Tissue Regeneration - From Basic Biology to Clinical Application
Edited by Jamie Davies, ISBN 978-953-51-0387-5, 520 pages, Publisher: InTech, Chapters
published March 30, DOI: 10.5772/1354
[60] Vincent L, Soille P (1991) Watersheds in digital spaces: an ecient algorithm based on
immersion simulations. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 13(16):583-598.
[61] Wasserman F (2011) The development of adipose tissue. Compr. Physiol. Supplement
15: Handbook of Physiology, Adipose Tissue:87-100 First published in print 1965.
doi:101002/cphycp050110.
[62] Vindigni V, Giatsidis G, Reho F, Venezia E D, Mammana M, Franco B (2012) Adipose
Derived Stem Cells: Current State of the Art and Prospective Role in Regenerative Medicine
and Tissue Engineering, chapter in Tissue Regeneration - From Basic Biology to Clinical
Application Edited by Jamie Davies, ISBN 978-953-51-0387-5, 520 pages, Publisher: InTech,
Chapters published March 30, DOI: 10.5772/1354
25