Title: High-throughput design of cultured tissue moulds using a biophysical
  model
Abstract:   The technique presented here identifies tethered mould designs, optimised for
growing cultured tissue with very highly-aligned cells. It is based on a
microscopic biophysical model for polarised cellular hydrogels. There is an
unmet need for tools to assist mould and scaffold designs for the growth of
cultured tissues with bespoke cell organisations, that can be used in
applications such as regenerative medicine, drug screening and cultured meat.
High-throughput biophysical calculations were made for a wide variety of
computer-generated moulds, with cell-matrix interactions and tissue-scale
forces simulated using a contractile-network dipole-orientation model.
Elongated moulds with central broadening and one of the following tethering
strategies are found to lead to highly-aligned cells: (1) tethers placed within
the bilateral protrusions resulting from an indentation on the short edge, to
guide alignment (2) tethers placed within a single vertex to shrink the
available space for misalignment. As such, proof-of-concept has been shown for
mould and tethered scaffold design based on a recently developed biophysical
model. The approach is applicable to a broad range of cell types that align in
tissues and is extensible for 3D scaffolds.

Full Text: High-throughput design of cultured tissue moulds using a biophysical model
James P. Hague, Allison E. Andrews, and Hugh Dickinson
School of Physical Sciences, The Open University, Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA
(Dated: June 26, 2023)
The technique presented here identifies tethered mould designs, optimised for growing cultured
tissue with very highly-aligned cells. It is based on a microscopic biophysical model for polarised
cellular hydrogels. There is an unmet need for tools to assist mould and scaffold designs for the
growth of cultured tissues with bespoke cell organisations, that can be used in applications such as
regenerative medicine, drug screening and cultured meat. High-throughput biophysical calculations
were made for a wide variety of computer-generated moulds, with cell-matrix interactions and tissue-
scale forces simulated using a contractile-network dipole-orientation model. Elongated moulds with
central broadening and one of the following tethering strategies are found to lead to highly-aligned
cells: (1) tethers placed within the bilateral protrusions resulting from an indentation on the short
edge, to guide alignment (2) tethers placed within a single vertex to shrink the available space for
misalignment. As such, proof-of-concept has been shown for mould and tethered scaffold design
based on a recently developed biophysical model. The approach is applicable to a broad range of
cell types that align in tissues and is extensible for 3D scaffolds.
Keywords: Biophysical simulation, cell-matrix interaction, self-organisation of cells, cultured tissue, tethered
moulds and scaffolds, high-throughput design
I. INTRODUCTION
It is both difficult and time consuming to design
moulds and scaffolds to make artificial tissue with re-
alistic characteristics, and new tools to speed up this
design process are needed. Cultured tissues mimic the
3D structures in real tissues and have applications as
regenerative medicine [1], pharmacological assays [2, 3],
cultured meats [4], and for the study of fundamental bi-
ology. Several growth strategies for 3D engineered tissue
are available [1]. Tethered, cell-laden hydrogels can be a
convenient way to make such tissues and have potential
for applications in high-throughput screening (e.g. mus-
cle [5, 6]), drug testing (e.g. tendons [7]) and growing
small volumes of tissue for regenerative medicine (e.g.
neural tissue [8] and cornea [9]).
Depending on the application, there may be several
different objectives for a mould or scaffold design. It
may be desired to maximise the overall alignment of the
tissue and minimise the tension in the sample (as tension
can cause challenges such as breakage if it is necessary
to remove the hydrogel from the mould). When growing
highly aligned or polarised tissues using tethering, there
is often a misaligned region shaped like a Greek ∆ close
to the tethers (see e.g. Ref. [10]). Depending on the
application, minimising the size of this ∆-region can be
important. There may also be constraints on size and
shape of the mould related to materials or growth media.
This can make the design process challenging. In this
paper, we carry out a proof-of-concept study to show
how the use of biophysical simulations can help to guide
design considerations.
In this paper, we use biophysical simulations of cell-
matrix interactions as a way to test large numbers of
mould designs in parallel and receive immediate infor-
mation regarding cell organisation, tension, tissue den-
sity and other properties [11, 12]. The extracellularmatrix (ECM) provides structure to tissue and is im-
portant for tissue development, maintenance and re-
pair [13]. The biophysical contractile-network-dipole-
orientation (CONDOR) model used here is a microscopic
approach that simulates cell-matrix interactions in tis-
sues (a key feature of cell behaviour in tissues [13] that
leads to self-organisation). Using this method, the self-
organisation of cells in tissue sizes of up to a few mm can
be simulated relatively quickly. When combined with
high-performance computing, hundreds of mould designs
can be tested and analysed automatically within a few
days. This allows for the pre-screening of designs before
the lengthy process of growth and microscopy in the lab.
CONDOR has been shown to accurately predict how cell-
matrix interactions drive shaping and self-organisation of
tethered cellular hydrogels of glial cells [11], and similar
self-organisation is found in hydrogels of skeletal muscle
[6], tendons [7], fibroblasts [10] and corneal tissue [9].
The goal of this paper is to show proof-of-concept for
the use of the CONDOR approach to identify the best
mould shapes and arrangements of tethers for cultured
tissue growth with specific characteristics (such as high
levels of cellular alignment and low tension). In Section
II, we introduce methods for the automated design of
moulds and tethers for tissue growth and briefly review
the CONDOR model. In Section III we identify moulds
for growing cultured tissues with very high levels of cel-
lular alignment. A discussion is found in Section IV.
Conclusions and summary can be found in Section V.
II. METHODOLOGY
A. Mould generation
We have developed a procedure to automatically gen-
erate plausible tethered mould designs for highly alignedarXiv:2306.13435v1  [physics.bio-ph]  23 Jun 20232
tissues [12]. In this paper, we use a subset of these
moulds. We begin by randomly generating a set of 3
to 6 points on a 2D canvas with xandycoordinates in
the range [0 ,1]. These points are then used to define a
simple polygon or convex hull. We reject any shapes with
a total area of less than half the canvas area. We generate
3 circular tethers at random positions within this poly-
gon, each with a radius between 0 .02 and 0 .065. A single
random position within this polygon is set as the origin
for axes of symmetry. A shape mirrored along both axes
is produced by firstly duplicating the initial polygon and
mirroring along one axis, then duplicating both the ini-
tial and new polygon and mirroring on the perpendicular
axis. These are combined into a single polygon that is
symmetric on both xandyaxes. Tethers are duplicated
and mirrored in the same fashion.
After duplication, tethers are pruned. This modifies
the distribution and reduces the total number of tethers
present within the final mould. Several types of exclusion
area for tethers are defined: (a) For 45% of cases, a cir-
cular exclusion area is placed in the centre of the mould
with a diameter that is selected randomly to be between
0.2 and 0.8 times the maximum mould width. (b) For
45% of cases, exclusion areas are defined as bars centred
on one or both of the axes of symmetry with width be-
tween 0.1 and 0.4 of the maximum mould width. (c)
For 5% of moulds we use a variation of the bar removal
regime in which the perpendicular bars are rotated about
the symmetry origin by a random angle; the final regime
has the potential of producing moulds with rotationally
symmetric tether arrangements rather than the mirror
symmetry of the mould. (d) For 5% of moulds we omit
tether removal. Examples of the exclusion area defined
in removal regimes (a), (b) and (c) are shown in Figure 1.
If, after this process, any mould has less than 4 tethers
remaining, it is discarded.
The Python Shapely package (version 2.0.1) is used to
refine the design [14]. The Shapely function ‘simplify’ is
applied to the object with tolerance 0.05 to remove very
intricate vertices with higher resolution than the simula-
tions, with the caveat of minor deviations from symmetry
occurring for some generated moulds; this is due to the
function not always selecting corresponding mirrored ver-
tices for removal and the biophysical simulations reflect
this deviation.
We use the ‘buffer’ method from Shapely to create
curved edges of both concave and convex type in the
mould design. Applying a negative buffer value followed
by a positive value (i.e. an antibuffer followed by a buffer)
creates a convex curved structure where outer corners ex-
ist. Likewise the opposite process with a positive buffer
value followed by a negative value generates a concave
structure with inner corners. Both of these processes can
be applied independently without affecting the structures
already generated by the other. Our mould generation
has a 25% probability of applying the convex rounding,
and separately a 75% probability of applying concave
rounding regardless of whether the convex rounding is ap-plied; this subsequently results in approximately 18 .75%
of cases having both types of rounding applied, as well
as another 18 .75% having neither. Examples of moulds
generated in this way can be seen throughout the paper.
B. CONDOR simulation
We simulate the self-organisation of tissues grown
within these mould shapes using the contractile net-
work dipole orientation (CONDOR) model [11], which
we briefly review here. The model comprises a contractile
network of bonds following Hooke’s law, with cells sitting
at the end of bonds. Cell-matrix interactions are incor-
porated by modifying each bond’s equilibrium length ac-
cording to the relative bond-to-cell orientation. The form
of the model is,
E=X
i<jκ0¯κij
2 
|lij| −l′
ij2(1)
where the adjustment to the bond length due to cell-
matrix interactions is,
l′
ij=l0
1−∆CM
2
2− |ˆlij·si|2− |ˆlij·sj|2
.(2)
Here, Erepresents the total energy of the system of
cells and force dipoles. ∆ CM(= 0.3) represents the cell-
matrix interaction strength (note that the model param-
eter ∆ CMshould not be confused with the ∆ region). l0
is the equilibrium distance of the bonds between cells in
the absence of cell-matrix interactions. We nominally set
l0= 40µm, although we note the model is scale indepen-
dent and results are given in terms of dimensionless quan-
tities. lijis the displacement between cells iandj. The
unitary vector si≡(sx, sy, sz) represents the orientation
of cell i.κ0(= 1) is the nearest-neighbour spring con-
stant, and only sets the energy scale (i.e. results are in-
dependent of κ0). We run simulations with cells arranged
on a face-centre-cubic (FCC) lattice to ensure shear mod-
ulus in the network. To prevent the whole lattice from
folding about a plane, we include more distant bonds in
the contractile network so that folds cost a high energy
due to compression in the longer range bonds. The di-
mensionless spring constant, ¯ κij, has the specific values
¯κNN= 1, ¯ κNNN = 0.4, ¯κNNNN = 0.2 and ¯ κNNNNN = 0.2
where NNN, NNNN and NNNNN represent next-nearest
through next-next-next nearest neighbours respectively.
The mould is scaled so its area is exactly 40% of the to-
tal simulation area of 62 .5l0×62.5l0and is given a depth,
4l0. The lowest energy state of this model is found using
simulated annealing [11]. Change in position or orien-
tation of a single cell up to a maximum distance or dif-
ference in angle is attempted with equal probability on
each iteration. The initial temperature of the anneal is
fixed at Tinit/κ0l2
0= 0.0625, a fixed number of iterations
is used ( Ncells×106, where Ncellsis the total number of
cells in the simulation) and the ratio between initial and3
FIG. 1. Examples of the different types of exclusion areas used for tether removal, including circular removal (a), symmetric
bar removal (b), and rotated bar removal (d).
final anneal temperatures Tinit/Tfinal= 107(note that
the anneal temperature is defined for simulated anneal-
ing only and is not the temperature of the tissue). For the
mould sizes selected, Ncells≈10000. A penalty of 109is
applied to the energy for each cell that is situated outside
the mould or inside a tether. The CONDOR simulation
of each individual tethered mould in this set takes ap-
proximately 24-36 core hours. We run the simulations in
parallel on a large multi-core machine allowing for rapid
throughput. Further details can be found in Ref. [11].
After the anneal is complete, we determine physical
properties of the simulated tissue within the moulds. Cell
orientation is read directly from the model. Average cell
orientation in the x-direction is calculated as,
s2
x,av=1
NcellsX
is2
x (3)
with similar measures in the yandzdirections. Two
measures of the tension are determined. The total of
the magnitude of the tension each bond connected to an
individual cell i:
τi=X
j|Tij| (4)
and the average tension per bond
|T|av=1
NbondsX
i<j|Tij| (5)
where
Tij=κ0¯κij 
|lij| −l′
ij
. (6)
andNbonds is the total number of bonds.III. RESULTS
After simulation of the self-organisation of cells within
moulds, results were ranked according to their total align-
ment, showing that alignments can exceed 80% of the
maximum possible alignment, and that the best aligned
moulds have low tension. Specifically, we rank accord-
ing to the largest s2
x,av. In the event that s2
y,avis larger
than s2
x,av(which typically happens if the mould is elon-
gated on the yinstead of the xdirection) the mould (and
its contents) is rotated by 90 degrees to facilitate com-
parison. Fig. 2(a) shows average alignments by rank
order. Tension for each mould is shown as a scatter
and the average tension and its standard deviation for
bins of 50 closely ranked moulds is displayed with error
bars to show the trend. The largest alignments in the
moulds considered exceed s2
x,av∼0.8 and the lowest are
around s2
x,av∼0.4 (note that for random alignments in
3D,sx,av= 1/3). Moulds containing simulated tissue
with the highest alignments have low tension. Moulds
with high tension tend to have poor alignment. Overall,
tension and alignment do not show a strong correlation.
The trend is that the maximum possible average tension
decreases with alignment. We note that it is possible to
find poorly aligned moulds with low tension. There are
no highly aligned moulds with high tension.
Tension is not a strong predictor of alignment, as
shown by ranking by average tension (Fig. 2(b)). Align-
ment for each mould is also shown as a scatter for com-
parison. The average and standard deviations of ten-
sion are shown as errorbars for bins of 50 closely ranked
moulds. Again, there is no overall correlation between
tension and alignment. The moulds with the highest4
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
 0 50 100  150  200  250  300  350  400  450  500 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 (a)
sx,av2
|T|av/κ0l0
ranksx,av2
|T|av/κ0l0
〈|T|av/κ0l0〉
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
 0 50 100  150  200  250  300  350  400  450  500 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 (b)
sx,av2
|T|av/κ0l0
ranksx2
|T|av/κ0l0
〈sx2〉
FIG. 2. (a) Ranked alignments show that moulds contain-
ing tissue with the highest alignments have low tension and
a maximum average alignment s2
x,av∼0.8. Moulds with high
tension tend to have poor alignment. Ranked alignments are
shown as blue points. The scatter of tension for each mould
is also shown in light grey, with the mean and standard de-
viation calculated from blocks of 50 moulds to highlight the
trend in tension with alignment rank (black line with error
bars). (b) Tensions sorted by rank order (red points). The
scatter of alignment for each case is also shown in light gray.
The moulds with the highest alignments tend to be associ-
ated with low tensions, but it is also possible for low tension
moulds to have poor alignment. Moulds with the highest ten-
sions have poor alignment.
alignments are associated with low tensions, but it is
also possible for low tension moulds to have poor align-
ment. Moulds with the highest tensions tend to have
poor alignment. The maximum possible alignment tends
to descrease as tension increases. We note that the corre-
lation between maximum possible alignment and tension
is weaker than the correlation between maximum pos-
sible tension and alignment. Since the goal here is to
find highly aligned moulds with low tension then rank-
ing according to alignment is sufficient to ensure that the
simulated tissue is under low tension.
Figure 3 shows the best 9 moulds with regard to orien-
tation, highlighting two strategies for maximising align-
ment of cells. Moulds leading to highly aligned (simu-
lated) tissue are elongated and contain tethers located
close to the short edge of the mould. The alignment is
optimised by minimising the ∆ region via one of two ap-proaches: The first strategy is an indentation or concave
region on the short edge of the mould, with tethers then
placed within the protrusions on either side of the inden-
tation Fig. 3(b,d,e,f,g). The second strategy is that mul-
tiple columns of tethers are found within a single convex
vertex at the end of the short edge, Fig. 3(a,h). In two of
the cases shown, a hybrid strategy leads to a very short
edge with a small indentation Fig. 3(c,i). In all cases the
moulds are narrowed towards the short edge and are typ-
ically much broader in the central region of the mould.
This is likely to increase the proportion of aligned tissue
since the smaller short edge decreases the potential area
of the misaligned region. The long edge is more compli-
cated with fewer commonalities. Several examples have
an indentation towards the centre of the long edge, but
protrusions to almost diamond shaped moulds also oc-
cur. Moulds with a broader centre may lead to squarer
regions of polarised tissue centrally e.g. Fig. 3(f), but
highly aligned rounded regions are also possible Fig. 3(i).
Square or circular regions of aligned tissue may have dif-
ferent applications (for e.g. repair or representation of a
region of cornea). Differences in total alignment between
the best examples shown here are approximately 5%.
Fig. 4 shows that the absolute value of the tension on
a cell, τi, is relatively small in all the highly aligned cases
identified in Fig. 3. We define the absolute value of the
tension to be the sum of the magnitudes of the tensions in
all bonds associated with a single cell. Relative to tissue
simulated in other moulds, the tension is smallest for
highly aligned simulated tissues. Tension is highest close
to tethers where there are regions of rapidly changing
alignment. For moulds with multiple columns of tethers,
shown in Fig. 4(a,h), tension can be high between the
tethers, which may cause challenges if it is necessary to
remove the tissue from the mould. Note that the average
tension per bond as defined in Eq. 5 is shown above the
plots, whereas the total tension on a cell as defined in
Eq. 4 is shown within the plots.
To understand why some strategies work well, it can
be helpful to examine cases where alignment is predicted
to be far from optimal, which occurs in e.g. moulds
with excessive numbers of (or conflicting) tethers. Ex-
amples of simulated tissue ranked according to alignment
in steps of 50 are shown in Fig. 5, where the lowest
ranked moulds have the worst alignment. The presence
of excessive numbers of tethering points leads to regions
of poorly aligned cells between the tethers. The worst
aligned example in Fig. 5(a), which is rank number 51,
has tethers distributed broadly across the mould area. As
alignment increases, tethers move towards the short edge
of the mould. For the highest aligned example shown in
this figure (Fig. 5(i), which is rank 451) the tethers are
situated directly beside the short edge of the mould and
the mould is elongated along the xaxis.
High tension is typically associated with regions of
frustration, where orientations change rapidly, which of-
ten occurs around tethers, and also in the bulk of the
tissue when there are large numbers of conflicting teth-5
FIG. 3. Top 9 moulds (rank 492-500) with regard to orientation indicate two strategies for maximising alignment. Cells in the
simulated tissue are highly aligned. The two strategies are: (1) indentations in the short axis act to reduce the size of the ∆
region, (2) double columns of tethers placed within a single vertex reduce the ∆ region. Tensions tend to be slightly higher for
strategy (2) as seen in Fig. 4. In the figures, blue indicates alignment along the yaxis and orange along the xaxis. Tethers
are shown in cyan and the mould area in light grey. For convenience average alignment and tension per bond for each mould
are shown above the plots.6
FIG. 4. Tensions within the top 9 moulds (ranks 492-500) ranked with regard to orientation are generally low. For strategies
where two columns of tethers have reduced the ∆ region, tension is high between the two columns. In the figures, black and
red indicate regions of low tension, yellow and white indicate regions of high tension. Tethers are shown in cyan and the outline
of the mould in grey.7
FIG. 5. Figure showing how alignment improves by ranking in a range of designs. Ranks 51 to 451 are shown in steps of 50.
For lower ranked cases, tethers are spread across the mould and moulds do not have a long axis. Higher ranked moulds have a
long axis with tethers situated closest to the short axis. Small indentations along the short axis help to reduce the size of the
∆ region.
ers. Analysis of tension for the ranked moulds shown in
Fig. 6 highlights the causes of misaligned regions (all
cases correspond to the moulds in Fig. 5). In many
moulds which are predicted to have poorly aligned cells,the tissue is typically under high tension. High tension
may also occur away from tethering points if other teth-
ers promote alignment in conflicting directions causing
frustration towards the centre of the tissue. Tension is8
low for the best aligned cases shown in Fig. 6(g,h,i). In
the remaining figures, we consider the effect of specific
changes to mould shapes and the positioning of tethers
on the alignment.
Elongation is important to reduce the relative size of
the ∆-region compared to the overall mould, but other-
wise does not decrease the area of the ∆ region. In Fig.
7 we show examples where the ratio of short to long axes
varies. For the elongated mould in Fig. 7(a), the ∆ re-
gions are of similar size but the region of aligned tissue is
larger due to the anisotropy in the mould. For the almost
square mould in Fig. 7(c), the ∆ regions from the two
axes overlap.
Indenting the short edge leads to a reduced ∆-region
size. In Fig. 8 we show two similar examples, one with
a significant indent on the short axis and the other with
a straight short edge. The indent guides the cells in the
right direction, and supplants the misaligned ∆ region.
The tension (not shown) is low in both cases.
Poorly positioned tethers that are not close to the short
axis vertices lead to larger ∆ regions, as can be seen
in Fig. 9. In Fig. 9(a) the tethers are closer to the
short edge and the ∆ region is relatively smaller than in
Fig. 9(b), where the tethers are far from the short edge,
but otherwise close to the boundary of the mould. This
highlights how the positioning of tethers, as well as the
shape of the mould, can be very important for creating
polarised tissues.
For strategies involving moulds with a single end ver-
tex, a single column of tethers may also be effective and
reduce tension. In Fig. 10, we examine tethering strate-
gies where there is a single vertex at the end of the mould,
rather than a short edge. In those cases the best moulds
had two columns of tethers close to the point of the ver-
tex (see Fig. 3). There are no major differences if a single
tethering column is used (compare Fig. 10(b) and Fig.
10(c)). On the other hand, if the two columns of tethers
become widely separated, misalignments occur (compare
Fig. 10(a) and Fig. 10(b)). The corresponding tension
per cell is shown in Fig. 10(d,e,f), and is high between
columns of tethers, increasing with the distance between
the columns. In contrast, the tension is relatively low in
the case where there is a single row of tethers.
IV. DISCUSSION
Currently, a limited number of tethered scaffold mould
designs are used for lab-grown tissues with a few common
designs which all suffer from misaligned cells (∆ regions).
Tendons and muscle have been grown in moulds with two
tethering points (one at each end), which leads to a sin-
gle aligned fibre between the tethers and a region of mis-
alignment around the tether [5–7]. The second grouping
includes hydrogels containing astrocytes which have been
grown in moulds with four tethering points [15], astro-
cytes and corneal tissues that have been grown within
an I shaped clamp where multiple tethering points arefound in a line towards the end of the mould [9, 16],
and moulds with attachment bars that have been used
to grow fibroblast containing hydrogels [10]. In those
cases, a ∆ region containing unwanted misaligned tissue
can be found. Highly aligned astrocytes grown in such
moulds have been considered as a potential guide for neu-
rons during nerve regeneration, and for such applications
the misaligned region is a hindrance to neuron growth
[17].
We have shown how it is possible to use a compu-
tational model to predict which mould designs can re-
duce the ∆ region. We have concentrated on nearly flat
moulds suitable for growth of elongated cells with a pref-
erence to align e.g. fibroblasts, tendonocytes, astrocytes
and cornea, although we expect the principles to work for
fully three dimensional scaffolds and any kind of cells that
become highly aligned within tissues. The best mould
designs proposed here have potential to improve guides
for neuronal growth and for use in the development of
engineered tissue for assays and other applications where
high alignment is required. The significance of the use
of a biophysical model for mould design is twofold. De-
signing moulds and scaffolds that lead to specific pat-
terns of self-organisation in artificial tissues is a slow and
painstaking effort, so tools such as biophysical models of-
fer the potential to design moulds quickly to grow specific
tissue structures for e.g. pharmaceutical assays, drug
screening and regenerative medicine. Also, biophysical
models are applicable to the self-organisation in three-
dimensional scaffolds where it is much harder to assess
the organisation of lab-grown tissue. The key advantage
of the biophysical model is the rate of throughput, since
high performance computing can be used to make cal-
culations for high numbers of mould designs in parallel
and also the organisation and other properties of cells in
those tissues, such as tension, can be immediately com-
puted by the model without the need to make complex
experimental measurements to determine those proper-
ties. Ultimately, biological experiments will be needed
to confirm the predictions, but only the best candidates
need to be explored, making the experimental effort tar-
geted and as efficient as possible.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In summary, we have applied a microscopic biophys-
ical model for self-organisation due to cell-matrix inter-
actions in lab-grown polarised tissues, to the design of
moulds for highly aligned cultured tissue growth. We pre-
dict such moulds would be suitable for growth of highly
aligned neural tissue, muscle, tendons, cornea and fibrob-
lasts. We demonstrated proof-of-concept for using the
model for high-throughput rational design of artificial
tissues. We used our biophysical model to make high-
throughput calculations for a wide range of computer-
generated moulds. We used alignment and tension to
identify, computationally, the relative merit of moulds9
FIG. 6. Analysis corresponding to the designs shown in Fig. 5 demonstrates how tension is affected by tether number and
positioning. Areas of high tension are associated with misaligned regions and tend to decrease with rank. Large numbers of
tethers away from the short axis typically lead to high tension.
for growing artificial neural tissue. Using this process,
we have identified candidate mould designs for growth of
artificial neural and other tissue with favourable prop-
erties. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
time a biophysical model has been used for the design oftethered scaffolds or moulds.
In conclusion, two strategies were identified to increase
alignment and minimise regions of misalignment: (1) in-
dentation on the short edge of the mould, with tethers
then placed within the protrusions on either side of the10
FIG. 7. Change in ∆ region due to decrease in ratio of short to long axis. Overall the shape of the ∆ region is not strongly
affected by the length of the mould, but misaligned regions can dominate if the mould is too short.
FIG. 8. Significant decreases in the ∆ region can be made by
inserting a concave region on the short axis.
FIG. 9. Changes in the size of the ∆ region due to positioning
of tethers. Poorly positioned tethers that are not tight to the
short axis vertices lead to larger ∆ regions.11
FIG. 10. Strategies with tethers in a single vertex instead of a short edge (diamond tethers). In Panel (a) two columns of well
separated tethers lead to a region of poor alignment between the columns and as shown in Panel (d) high tension can be seen
between the columns. Panel (b): This region of misalignment is minimised by moving the tethers closer. Panel (c) A single
column of tethers also leads to high alignment, although the region of misalignment is larger in this case. Panels (e) and (f)
show the tension corresponding to the cases in Panels (b) and (c) respectively.
indentation (2) tethers inside a single vertex at the end
of the mould. Precise positioning of tethers was found
to be critical to optimise alignment, and small changes
in tether positions can lead to enlargements in the ∆-
region, a decrease in alignment and an increase in tension
within the tissue. The moulds are elongated with tethers
located at the short edge of the tether. In the best cases
the moulds widen away from the short edge.
We briefly discuss several aspects related to the future
outlook of the approach. Our goal here has been to find
moulds to create tethered hydrogels (artificial or cultured
tissues) with high levels of alignment and low internal
tension. As such, we have shown proof-of-principle for
high-throughput calculations suitable for applications re-
quiring such high alignment. A next step will be to grow
and analyse engineered tissue within these designs to con-
firm the predictions. For other applications it may be
necessary to optimise mould designs to grow tissues with
different cellular arrangements. The same design princi-ples can be applied to other applications: quasi-random
moulds with or without symmetries can be created in
large numbers and then high-throughput simulation of
these moulds using high-performance computing can be
used to rank the solutions. Further work will include
model extensions that will lead to further tools for ratio-
nal design of moulds, scaffolds, and other approaches for
growing artificial tissue. Designs could have multiple ap-
plications, including pharmaceutical assays, regenerative
medicine and to obtain appropriate texturing within cul-
tured meat. We will also work on extensions for the de-
sign of 3D scaffolds. Finally, we are exploring the applica-
tion of deep learning to the prediction of self-organisation
in tissues, and have recently developed a machine learn-
ing approach based on CONDOR for rapid prediction of
the arrangements of cells and the tensions between them
in tissues [12].12
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We acknowledge funding from the STFC Impact Ac-
celeration Account 2021-2022. We thank James Philipsfor useful discussions. We have registered moulds based
on the cases shown in Fig. 3, Panels (a) through (i) and
Fig. 6(i) as designs with UK registered design numbers:
6275900, 6275896, 6275894, 6275883, 6275867, 6275866,
6275865, 6275862, 6275860 and 6275851.
[1] P. Bajaj, R. M. Schweller, A. Khademhosseini, J. L.
West, and R. Bashir, 3D biofabrication strategies for tis-
sue engineering and regenerative medicine, Annu. Rev.
Biomed. Eng. 16, 247 (2014).
[2] M. Weinhart, A. Hocke, S. Hippenstiel, J. Kurreck, and
S. Hedtrich, 3D organ models - revolution in pharmaco-
logical research?, Pharmacol. Res. 139, 446 (2019).
[3] G. Jensen, C. Morrill, and Y. Huang, 3D tissue engineer-
ing, an emerging technique for pharmaceutical research,
Acta Pharm. Sin. B. 8, 756 (2018).
[4] T. Ben-Arye and S. Levenberg, Tissue engineering for
clean meat production, Front. Sustain. Food Syst. 3,
00046 (2019).
[5] A. J. Capel, R. P. Rimington, J. W. Fleming, D. J.
Player, L. A. Baker, M. C. Turner, J. M. Jones, N. R. W.
Martin, R. A. Ferguson, V. C. Mudera, and M. P.
Lewis, Scalable 3D printed molds for human tissue en-
gineered skeletal muscle, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 7,
00020 (2019).
[6] N. M. Wragg, D. J. Player, N. R. W. Martin, Y. Liu,
and M. P. Lewis, Development of tissue-engineered skele-
tal muscle manufacturing variables, Biotechnol. Bioeng.
116, 2364 (2019).
[7] J. Garvin, J. Qi, M. Maloney, and A. J. Banes, Novel sys-
tem for engineering bioartificial tendons and application
of mechanical load, Tissue Eng. Part A 9, 967 (2003).
[8] M. Georgiou, S. C. Bunting, H. A. Davies, A. J. Loughlin,
J. P. Golding, and J. B. Phillips, Engineered neural tissue
for peripheral nerve repair, Biomater. 34, 7335 (2013).
[9] D. Mukhey, J. Phillips, J. Daniels, and A. Kureshi, Con-
trolling human corneal stromal stem cell contraction to
mediate rapid cell and matrix organization of real archi-
tecture for 3-dimensional tissue equivalents, Acta Bio-
mater. 67, 229 (2018).
[10] M. Eastwood, V. Mudera, D. McGrouther, and
R. Brown, Effect of precise mechanical loading on fibrob-last populated collagen lattices: Morphological changes,
Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton 40, 13–21 (1998).
[11] J. P. Hague, P. W. Mieczkowski, C. O’Rourke, A. J.
Loughlin, and J. B. Phillips, Microscopic biophysical
model of self-organization in tissue due to feedback be-
tween cell- and macroscopic-scale forces, Phys. Rev. Res.
2, 043217 (2020).
[12] A. Andrews, H.Dickinson, and J. Hague, arXiv: ,
2303.18017 (2023).
[13] J. K. Kular, S. Basu, and R. I. Sharma, The extracellular
matrix: Structure, composition, age-related differences,
tools for analysis and applications for tissue engineering,
J. Tissue Eng. 5, 2041731414557112 (2014).
[14] S. Gillies, C. van der Wel, J. van den Bossche,
M. Taves, J. Arnott, and B. Ward, Shapely, version
2.0.1 (Jan 30th 2023), doi:10.5281/zenodo.5597138,
https://pypi.org/project/Shapely and
https://github.com/shapely/shapely.
[15] C. O’Rourke, C. Lee-Reeves, R. A. L. Drake, G. W. W.
Cameron, A. J. Loughlin, and J. B. Phillips, Adapting
tissue-engineered in vitro cns models for high-throughput
study of neurodegeneration, J. Tissue Eng. 8, 1 (2017).
[16] C. O’Rourke, R. A. Drake, G. W. Cameron, J. A. Lough-
lin, and J. B. Phillips, Optimising contraction and align-
ment of cellular collagen hydrogels to achieve reliable and
consistent engineered anisotropic tissue., J. Biomater.
Appl. 30, 599 (2015).
[17] E. East, D. B. De Oliviera, J. P. Golding, and J. B.
Phillips, Alignment of astrocytes increases neuronal
growth in three-dimensional collagen gels and is main-
tained following plastic compression to form a spinal cord
repair conduit, Tissue Eng. Part A 16, 3173 (2010).