Title: Inflamm-ageing: How cytokines and nutrition shape the trajectory of ageing.
Abstract: Population ageing is increasing in prevalence in most developed countries. Ageing is the decline of functional properties at the cellular, tissue, and organ level. Biochemical changes that occur in all organisms that experience biological ageing are referred to as the "Hallmarks of ageing". Inflammation is a common denominator of the hallmarks of ageing, being mechanistically involved in most age-related health consequences. Inflamm-ageing refers to age-related changes in the inflammatory and immune systems which somehow drive the ageing process towards healthy or unhealthy ageing. Current evidences, support that, reversing the age-related pro-inflammatory status of inflamm-ageing, is able to modulate most hallmarks of ageing. Inflamm-ageing is associated with increased levels of pro-inflammatory molecules (e.g. cytokines, chemokines), ultimately producing a chronic low-grade inflammatory state typically observed in older individuals. It is commonly accepted that, the balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines/chemokines is one of the factors determining whether healthy or unhealthy ageing occurs. Malnutrition and nutritional imbalances, are highly prevalent in the elderly, playing a role in driving the balance of pro- and anti-inflammatory immunoactive molecules. In particular, malnutrition is a major risk factor for sarcopenia, a phenomenon characterized by loss of muscle mass, which is often referred to as the biological basis for frailty. Given the close relationship between malnutrition and sarcopenia, there is also evidence for a link between malnutrition and frailty. Indeed, changes in cytokine/chemokine levels in elderly patients with malnutrition were demonstrated. The demonstration that specific cytokines play a role in modulating appetite and nutrient sensing and taste reception, provided further evidence for the existence of a link between inflamm-ageing, nutrition and cytokines in shaping the trajectory of ageing. The present review will overview current evidence supporting the role of specific circulating cytokines and chemokines in the relationship between ageing, inflammation, and malnutrition.
Full Text: Full text not available