Title: Information -sharing, adaptive epigenetics and human longevity
Abstract:   Emerging empirical and theoretical thinking about human aging places
considerable value upon the role of the environment as a major factor which can
promote prolonged healthy longevity. Our contemporary, information-rich
environment is taken to mean not merely the actual physical surroundings of a
person but it is also considered in a more abstract sense, to denote cultural,
societal and technological influences. Our modern environment is far from being
static or stable. In fact, it is continually changing in an exponential manner,
necessitating constant adaptive responses on behalf of our developmental and
evolutionary mechanisms. In this paper, I attempt to describe how a continual,
balanced and meaningful exposure to a stimulating environment, including
exposure to information-that-requires-action (but NOT trivial information), has
direct or indirect repercussions on epigenetic mechanisms which may then act to
prolong healthy longevity. Information gained from our environment acts as a
hormetic stimulus which up-regulates biological responses and feedback loops,
eventually leading to improved repair of age-related damage. The consequence of
this biological information-processing mechanism may influence resource
allocation and redress the imbalance between somatic cell versus germ-line cell
repairs. This can eventually have evolutionary consequences resulting in the
drastic reduction of age-related disease and degeneration.

Full Text: Information -sharing, adaptive epigenetics and human l ongevity  
Author:  
Marios Kyriazis,  
ELPIs Foundation for Indefinite Lifespans,  
email:  drma rios@live.it  
 
 
Abstract  
Emerging empirical and theoretical thinking about human aging places  
considerable value upon the role of the environment as a major factor which can 
promote  prolonged healthy longevity.  Our contemporary, ‘information -rich’ 
environment is taken to mean not merely the actual physical surroundings of a 
person but it is also considered  in a more abstract sense, to denote cultural, 
societal and technological influence s. Our modern environment  is far from 
being  static  or stable. In fact, it is continually chang ing in an exponential 
manner , necessitating constant adaptive  respons es on behalf of our 
developmental and evolutionary mechanisms . In this paper, I attempt to 
describe how a continual , balanced  and meaningful exposure to a stimulating 
environment, including exposure to ‘information -that-requires -action ’ (but NOT 
trivial information) , has direct or indirect repercussions o n epigenetic 
mechanisms which may then act to  prolong healthy longevity.  Information 
gained from our environment acts as a hormetic stimulus which up -regulates 
biological responses and f eedback loops, eventually leading to improved repair 
of age -related d amage . The consequence  of this biological information -
processing mechanism may influence resource allocation and redress the 
imbalance between somatic cell versus germ -line cell repairs. This can 
eventually have evolutionary consequences resulting in the drastic reduction of 
age-related disease and degeneration.  
 
Key words: Hormesis, Longevity, Information, Adaptation, Techno -cultural 
environment , Environmental enrichment  
 
Introduction  Adaptive phenotypic plasticity is an important factor in human evolution. There 
is considerable evidence suggesting that the environment influences the 
plasticity of the phenotype  [1] and that there exist precise, if hitherto not very 
well studied, mechanisms , which respond to stimulating changes in the 
environment, in an attempt to adapt to the stimulus  [2]. This adaptation to a 
stimulus is very relevant in the study of age -related pathology and in the 
evolution of ag ing in general. Increasing ly, research shows that the environment 
is crucial in determining prolonged healthy longevity  [3]. In human terms, the 
‘environment ’ is an abstract notion of an amalgam of physical and virtual 
surroundings, interactions  with modern society , and techno -cultura l elements.  It 
is, in other words, a highly ‘information -rich’ milieu . It is worth noting at this 
point that I  define information as ‘a meaningful set of data or patterns which 
influence the formation or transformation of other data or patterns, in order t o 
reduce uncertainty and help achieve a goal’  [4] (FIGURE 1 ).  
 
FIGURE1  
Information  
           +                          Complexity                Functionality                Fitness                  Survival  
Organisation                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                          
 
Figure 1 . Information (plus organisation) increases complexity and this increases functionality. This 
improves fitness and thus survival.  Any increase in internal fitness requires the formation of new 
links and the strengthening of the interconnectedne ss between its nodes i.e. increased complexity, 
thus increased fitness and increased survival.   
 
However, as our environment is constantly changing, (and recently, changing at 
an ever -accelerating manner  [5]) we need to quickly adapt to the se changes in 
order to be able to survive.  This may depend on artificial selection (through 
technology  and, for example, exposure to meaningful information) r ather the 
slower Darwinian natural selection processes  [6]. Epigenetic factors mediate 
between the g enome and the environment , and play a n important role in this 
respect, allowing for rapid changes in protein expression which may be applied 
almost immediately when needed.   
There is an increasing body of research which highlights the role of epigenetic 
changes in age -related degeneration  [7]. Epigenetic changes such as chromatin remodelling and DNA methylation can modify the phenotype and play a 
modulating  role in senescence  and age-diseas e. One of the reasons for this , is 
based on the fact that epigenet ic processes  can regulat e mechanisms necessary 
for development  [8]. The process of aging has been explained by s everal  
authors as a continual and excessive operation of basic developmental , which 
eventually lead to time-related malfunction [9, 10 ], therefore a corrective 
regulation of this defective  process could  lead to  the control  of at least some 
aging  mechanisms . In addition, it is known that there could be ‘molecular 
breaks’ which restrict the plasticity of adult cells, in particular neu rons [11]. The 
use of epigenetic interventions may lead to stabilisation a nd delayed expression 
of these break factors and thus allow for easier and quick plasticity of the cell. 
The fact that several of these factors are found in the extracellular space makes 
it more likely that epigenetic control would be more effective compared to 
genetic intracellular mechanisms.  
 
Hormesis and stress  
Several e nvironmental factors are closely linked to the epigenetic regulation of 
gene expression. This epigenetic regulation may lead to adaptive changes , 
which increase the likelihood of successful survival within a particular niche. 
The epigenetic changes can be predictable, can occur both during early and late 
developmental stages, and can result in improvement of the functional ability of 
the organism  [12]. It has been shown that environmental stress induces 
epigenetic changes and result s in an adaptive respon se to the s tress in question 
[13]. The question arises: “what is stress?” In this context stress is taken to 
mean exposure to a stimulus which disrupts homeostasis and necessitates a 
reaction in order for the organism to adapt to this stimulus . 
Stress (or more colloquially  ‘positive stress’) can be of hormetic origin  i.e. a 
dose-response phenomenon ( with low-dose stim ulation  and high-dose 
inhibition)  [14-17]. Hormesis is considered as a process of continual novelty , 
which affects basic biological parameters [18]. Vaiserman [19] conside rs that a 
mild stress -induced ho rmetic response involves mechanisms similar to the 
mechanisms that underlie developmental epigenetic adaptations , with resulting 
life-span prolonging properties . Examples of positive hormetic stress include 
calorie restriction, physical exercise, and certain chemical compounds including 
free radicals and mild toxins.  In addition, there could be other types of hormetic 
stimulation such as cultural, societal and psychological  factors , all of whi ch 
interact at multiple levels. It can be argued that hormetic stress, as the type 
encountered in our everyday highly technological, intensely information -sharing environment, may cause direct epigenetic changes , which facilitate our 
adaptation to this env ironment. But, by scrut inising these epigenetic changes 
more closely, one may find  that there are similarities with some of the  
mechanisms that repair  age-related damage. This may be due to rapid up -
regulation of genes responsible for  adaptive  response, wh ich can have an effect 
on healthy life extension [20]. It has to be highlighted however that excessive 
stress is a well-known  determinant  for disease.   
Although  epigenetic adaptations to a changing environment can occur during 
early stages of development, it is also possible to experience epigenetic 
plasticity in later life stages [21]. This is a promising fact , which supports the 
view that hormetic stressors can up-regulate healthy longevity mechanisms even 
if applied later in life.  Although the search for an ideal type of mild positive 
(hormetic) stress still continues, it makes sense to consider  stimuli  which are 
directly rel evant to our current technological  and information -rich environment ; 
stresses that must  lead to adaptation. For instance , exposure to  a relentless 
information -sharing environment , such as meaningful online hyper -
connectedness, which acts as a kind of hormetic stimulus would lead to an 
adaptive response which may  up-regulate  several health parameters  [22] as 
discussed below.  Once again it must be emphasized that the issue here concerns 
meaningful stimulation containing information that requires action, and not 
trivial or meaningless info rmation . 
 
Resource allocation   
How can an information -rich environment affect biological parameters and lead 
to a reduced rate of senescence? It has been suggested that although efficient 
repair mechanisms are present in somatic cells these are traded -off in germ -line 
cells against optimal and successful survival (of the species). Heininger [23] 
quotes:  
Evolution through natural selection can be described as driven by a 
perpetual conflict of individuals competin g for limited resources. Somatic 
death is a germ cell -triggered event  (emphasis mine ) and has been 
established as evolutionary -fixed default state following asymmetric 
reproduction in a world of finite resources. Aging, on the other hand, is 
the stress res istance -dependent phenotype of the somatic resilience that 
counteracts the germ cell -inflicted death pathway. Thus, aging is a 
survival response and, in contrast to current beliefs, is antagonistically 
linked to death that is not imposed by group selection  but enforced upon the soma by the selfish genes of the “enemy within”  (i.e. the germ -line 
cells, comment mine ). Environmental conditions shape the trade -off 
solutions as compromise between the conflicting germ –soma interests. 
Mechanistically, the neuroendocrine system, particularly those 
components that control energy balance, reproduction and stress 
responses, orc hestrate these events.  
Therefore, the  concept of aging can be viewed , at least partly, as a conflict 
between germ -line cells and soma tic cells, whereby immortalisation factors are 
preferentially diverted towards germ -line cells , in order to assure the survival of 
the species, instead of being used by the somatic cells  [24]. This results in a 
continual effective repair of the germ cells , which exhibit robust anti -
senescence traits, at the expense of the somatic cells which eventu ally become 
overwhelmed by damage. This maintenance gap is a matter of both resources 
required  and resources a llocated , that is to say that if resources are constantly 
required, these will be allocated in order to assure long term survival, despite 
the sho rt-term evolutionary cost  [25]. The main existing evolutionary reason for 
this is the need to assure the survival of the species, which can currently be 
achieved much more energy -efficiently through immortalisation of germ line 
cells.  
I have suggested that it may be possible to re -balance the germ -soma conflict 
using continual exposure to insightful information, a mechanism which depends 
on epigenetic modification and is in accordance with basic evolutionary 
requirements  [26]. This is a  typical example of how environmental effects  (i.e. 
hyper -connection and a continual exposure to digital technology for example)  
can have a direct impact upon age -regulating mechanisms via epigenetic instead 
of genetic  changes . It is possible to examine further the role of  epigenetic 
mechanisms  in relation to the s hifting of resources from  germ -line to somatic 
repair s. For instance , it is known that there exist n on-autonomous contribution s 
of somatic cells to germ line cells, leading to germ -line immortal isation [27]. 
These contributions aid germ -line survival and immortalisation . Such strategies 
may also be present in somatic cells, but are significantly down -regulate d [28]. 
The aim here is to examine how this rejuvenation process can be driven to 
operate in somatic cells [29]. It is important to highlight that certain 
mechanisms of germ line rejuvenation could be dependent upon epigenetic 
modifications and factors  that regulate transcription [30]. Thus it  is also 
plausible  that epigenetic co -ordination may have certain rejuvenating effects 
upon somatic cells  although, clearly, more research is needed in this area . It is 
also worth remembering that not all epigenetic regulation may lead to positive 
results.  For example,  increasing methylation may down -regulate  a deleterious signa lling pathway but it may also down - regulate tumo ur suppressor genes  
increasing the risk of cancer  [31, 32] . This also needs further research.  
This conflict for survival between somatic and germ -line cells can be 
conceivabl y reversed if the survival of somatic cells becomes a priority over th e 
survival  of germ -line cells. The mechanism for this is likely to involve  hormetic 
epigenetic influences of the environment upon the soma.  The effectiveness of 
this process may be time -dependent , i.e. may depend on how early in life the 
organism is subjected to the ‘stressor’. Some evidence exists that if hormetic, 
epigenetic stressors are applied early in life, these will have a more pronounc ed 
and lasting effect [33].  
Flatt et al. [34] have shown that ch anges in the environment have a direct effect 
upon the regulation of somatic maintenance  and t hey suggest that the same 
genotype can express either of two alternative phenotypes, depending on  the 
particular environment . The example supports in principle the suggestion that 
suitable manipu lation of the environment (via exposure to relevant digital 
information , for example) can have effects on the human epigenome and 
modulate  aging.  Calvanese et  al. [35] suggest that the role of epigenetic 
modifications during aging is defined by the need for these specific epigenetic 
changes to exist, and, that these changes  must be functionally associated with 
the aged phenotype .  
 
The impact of information upon  the cell   
As mentioned above, information is meaningful set s of data which influence the 
formation or transformation of other data in order to reduce uncertainty (and 
thus entropy) and achieve a goal.  In the practical sense, I assume that Shannon’s 
information entropy [36] is similar to thermodynamical entropy, and the 
discussion is based upon this general model  [37].  
Most authorities agree t hat E nvironmental Enrichment (EE) (i.e. a stimulating 
and cha nging ‘information -rich’ environment) and hormesis have  an effect o n 
several parameters , such as an up -regulation of B rain Derived Neurotrophic 
Factor . In this particular case, it was also shown that an enriched (information -
rich) environment early in life  results in highly up -regulated  histone acetylation 
at the BDNF gene at adulthood , which happens quite fast  after a stimulating 
exposure [3 8]. With regards to BDNF, it is also known that its concentration is 
raised by exercise  [39].  This has direct relevance here , and I quote  from my 
own paper [26] :    The suggestion that a sustained exposure to actionable information 
forcibly induces a change in basic hitherto stable evolutionary processes 
is not an entirely speculative one. It has been proposed tha t increased 
aerobic activity (thus in this case physical, instead of cognitive, effort) 
had a direct evolutionary impact on the human brain [40]. The increased 
and sustained aerobic activity of hunter -gatherers resulted in the up -
regulation of peripheral B DNF and increased its concentration to such a 
degree that it eventually crossed the blood -brain barrier and directly 
influenced the function and survival of the neurons. The plasma 
concentrations of other factors that are normally found in the periphery 
(i.e. not in the brain) such as insulin -like growth factor 1 (IGF -1) and 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) all of which increase during 
physical activity, were elevated by the sustained physical effort and, 
having crossed the blood -brain barrier, rea ched the brain resulting in 
improved neurogenesis. Thus, it is hypothesized that other sustained 
activities, in this case cognitive stimulation, may have phys ical effects 
which cause a  transition from one evolutionary stage to another.  
 
It is known that  several e pigenetic mechanisms, including methylation of DNA  
and chromatin remodelling mediate gene regulation in neurons and thus have an 
important effect in regulating the development of the nervous system. These 
epigenetic modelling effects shape neural structure and function, and depend 
upon external environmental clues. Epigenetic gene regulation is important in 
regulating synaptic plasticity, neural behaviour and high order cognitive 
functions such as memory, learning and problem -solving abilities [41].  
In order to gain better insights into how information may affect epigenetic 
regulation, it is useful to  explore in some detail the process of information 
manipulation by the cell . In this case, a relevant example to consider is visual 
information.  When  new information is captured by retinal cells there is photonic 
recycling on the cell surface [ 42]. Ligand -receptor associations alter the 
conformation of the extracellular portion of intramembranous proteins and this 
change is transmitted to the cytoplasm  by the trans -membranous helical 
segments by non -linear vibrations of proteins  [42]. In addition, photon -photon 
interactions induce molecular vibrations responsible for bio -amplification of 
weak signals described by:  
   =BvLq    where m is the mass of th e molecule, c is the velocity of the electromagnetic 
field, B is the magnetic flux density, v is the velocity of the carrier in which the 
particle exists, L is its dimension, and q is a unit charge.  
When the signal is transmitted to the appropriate neuronal areas (in his case in 
the occipital cortex) it effects a neuronal response in terms of mainly epigenetic 
modulation such as DNA acetylation . The steps leading from the acquisition to 
the assimilation of the information require energy , and this energy needs to be 
diverted away from other processes in order to be made available to the 
information -manipulation  process. These adaptation mechanisms depend pa rtly 
on genetic function but ma inly on epigenetic factors , which are able to act faster 
than a ge netically -originated reaction, and provide more flexibility for 
optimising performance.  It is known that epigenetically -dependent adaptation to 
visual stimulation can be very rapid  [43]. Thus, the environment, through 
epigenetic regulation affects brain function, and it follows that if environmental 
stimulation is of a certain magnitude  and quality, this will have direct effects on 
cognition. Cognition and higher mental functions are essen tial in our current 
technological, high info rmation -dependant environment , and those who are able 
to adapt to these challenges are more likely  to survive within this milieu.  
Recent research has shed further  light in some of the mechanisms of the effects 
of the environment upon epigenetic regulation. For instance, it is known that 
genetic elements such as microRNAs (miRNAs) are effective epigenetic 
regulators of a genomic response to environmental stimuli. Environmental 
agents such as O3 exposure can disrupt  miRNA expression profiles and 
interfere with inflammation regulation  [44]. MicroRNAs contribute to genome 
plasticity and evolution, and are essential in controlling the expression of genes 
which may interfere with the aging process. Howev er, further study is needed in 
this respect, as many effects of miRNA regulation are still unknown  [45]. What 
is known is that t he number and function of miRNAs  is significantly up -
regulated in humans compared to other animals such as  chimpanzee, macaque, 
mouse, rat  or dog  [46]. This  may indicate that humans may have developed  
unique evolutionary genetic elements that can facilitate a better repair of 
damage , exactly because of the need to adapt quickly to a n information -rich 
technological environment  [47], an evolutionary situation  that is not relevant in 
other non -human animals.  
Finally, it is worth mentioning that  a chronically unpre dictable environment (i .e. 
as our c onstantly changing society and techno -culture ) can induce ph enotypic 
changes in the parents , which can be reflected in the unexposed offspring, 
suggesting that at least some of the epigenetic changes can be her itable. This adds robustness to  the notion suggesting that epigeneti c changes  are important 
in evolution, as these are more permanent and  can be subjected to evolutionary 
selection . Also, repeated stress early in life can protect against more sustained 
stress later in life  [48] and social factors can play a role in epigenetic regulation 
the effects of which not only persist throughout life,  but can also be tr ansmitted 
to the offspring via epigenetic inheritance  [49]. In addition, there are  specific 
epigenetic profile s associated with longevity  [50] which can be transmitted to 
the offspring.  Gentilini et al. [51] have shown that centenarians have certain 
specific DNA methylation characteristics (such as those found in nucleodite 
biosynthesis, and control of signal transmission) which are also found in their 
offspring, suggesting that these characteristics are her itable.  
 
Conclusion   
Epigenetic regulation mediates adaptation to  the environment, and when this 
environment is of a specific type (a n information -sharing,  fast changing techno -
cultural  setting ) then fast adaptation to this may have an impact upon  life-
extending biolog ical pro cesses . This epigenetic regulation, together with genetic 
and cell -specific factors can influence  longevity and have been studied within  a 
non-reductionist, integrative framework of ag ing [52]. The reductionist view 
that aging can be manipulated by simple biomedical repairs is unlikely to lead 
to any appreciable practical results that can be used in order to diminish the 
impact of age -related degeneration. Instead, a wider approach more likely to 
succeed would be to study the role of complexity, regulation and adaptation, 
and harness the function of fundamental processes such as the role of 
emergence and the ‘direction ’ of human evolution  [53]. This world -view has 
been encapsulated in philosophical reflections which transcend time and place, 
such as “Tempora  mutantur, nos et mutamur in illis ” ("Times change, and we 
change with them") . As our environment, society and culture change, so must 
we, in order to adapt to the change an d increase our fitness and chanc e of 
survival  [54]. One way we can effect a positiv e change is to increase exposure 
to meaningful technological information  that requires action  [55], and exploit 
the nature of relati vely fast epigenetic mechanisms  which, bound by 
evolutionary constraints , must result in suitable beneficial adaptations, an d thus 
extended survival.  
 
 
  
The author declare no conflicts of interest in this paper . 
 
 
REFERENCES  
1. Price TD, Qvarnström A, Irwin DE. (2003) The  role of phenotypic plasticity 
in driving genetic evolution. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences 270 (1523): 1433 –40 
2. Kelly SA, Panhuis TM, Stoehr AM. (2012) Phenotypic Plasticity: Molecular 
Mechanisms and Adaptive Significance. Compr  Physiol 2:1417 -1439  
3. Takano T, Nakamura K, Watanabe M. (2002) Urban residential environments 
and senior citizens' longevity in megacity areas: the importance of walkable 
green spaces. J Epidemiol Community Health 56(12):913 -8 
4. Frieden BR, Gatenby RA. (2011) Information Dynamics in Living Systems: 
Prokaryotes, Eukaryotes, and Cancer PLoS ONE 6(7): e22085  
5. Smart, J. (2005) Measuring Innovation in an Accelerating World, 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 72(8):988 -995 
6. Heylighen F. (1994) Fitne ss as Default: the evolutionary basis for cognitive 
complexity reduction, in: Cybernetics and Systems 1994, R. Trappl (ed.), World 
Science, Singapore, p.1595 -1602  
7. Gravina S, Vijg J. (2010) Epigenetic factors in aging and longevity. Pflugers 
Arch 459(2): 247-58 
8. Combes AN, Whitelaw E. (2010) Epigenetic reprogramming: enforcer or 
enabler of developmental fate? Dev Growth Differ 52(6):483 -91 
9. Carnes BA. (2011) What is lifespan regulation and why does it exist? 
Biogerontology 12(4):367 -74 
10. Walker RF. ( 2011) Developmental Theory of Aging Revisited: Focus on 
Causal and Mechanistic Links between Development and Aging.  Rejuvenation 
Res 14:429 -436 
11. Takesian AE, Hensch TK. (2013) Balancing plasticity/stability across brain 
development Prog Brain Res 207:3 -34 12. Vaiserman AM. (2011) Hormesis and epigenetics: Is there a link? Ageing 
Res Rev 10(4):413 -21 
13. Jablonka E, Lamb MJ. (1998) Epigenetic inheritance in evolution. J Evol 
Biol 11(2)159 –183 
14. Calabrese EJ, Mattson MP. (2011) Hormesis provides a gener alized 
quantitative estimate of biological plasticity. J Cell Commun Signal. 5(1):25 -38 
15. Rattan SI. (2014) Molecular gerontology: from homeodynamics to 
hormesis. Curr Pharm Des. 20(18):3036 -9 
16. Calabrese V, Cornelius C, Dinkova -Kostova AT, Calabrese E J, Mattson 
MP. (2010). Cellular stress responses, the hormesis paradigm, and vitagenes: 
novel targets for therapeutic intervention in neurodegenerative disorders. 
Antioxid Redox Signal.13(11):1763 -811 
17. Mattson MP. (2008) Awareness of hormesis will enhan ce future research in 
basic and applied neuroscience. Crit Rev Toxicol. 38(7):633 -9 
18. Agutter, PS. (2008) Elucidating the Mechanism(s) of Hormesis at the 
Cellular Level: The Universal Cell Response. Am J Pharmacol Toxicol 
3(1)100 -110 
19. Vaiserman AM. (2 010). Hormesis, Adaptive Epigenetic Reorganization, and 
Implications for Human Health and Longevity. Dose Response 8(1): 16 –21 
20. Vaiserman AM. (2008) Epigenetic engineering and its possible role in anti -
aging intervention. Rejuvenation Res 11(1):39 -42 
21. Fraga MF, Ballestar E, Paz MF, et al. (2005) Epigenetic differences arise 
during the lifetime of monozygotic twins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
102(30):10604 -9 
22.  Heylighen F (2014) Cybernetic Principles of Aging and Rejuvenation: the 
Buffering -Challengin g Strategy for Life Extension. Curr Aging Sci May 20. 
[Epub ahead of print]  
23. Heininger K. (2002) Aging is a deprivation syndrome driven by a germ –
soma conflict. Aging Res Rev 1(3); 481 -536 
24. Cossetti C, Lugini L, Astrologo L, Saggio I, Fais S, Spadafo ra C. (2014) 
Soma -to-Germline Transmission of RNA in Mice Xenografted with Human 
Tumour Cells: Possible Transport by Exosomes. PLoS One. ;9(7):e101629  
25.  Baudisch A, Vaupel JW. (2012) Getting to the root of aging. Science 338: 
6107, 618 -619 26. Kyriazis M. (2014) Reversal of Informational Entropy and the Acquisition 
of Germ -Like Immortality by Somatic Cells. Curr Aging Sci May 20. [Epub 
ahead of print]  
27. Kirkwood, T. B. (1987) Immortality of the germ -line versus disposability of 
the soma. Basic Life Sc iences 42:209 –218 
28. Smellick C, Ahmed S. (2005) Achieving immortality in the C.elegans 
germline.  Ageing Research Reviews, 4:67 -82 
29. Avise JC. (1993) The evolutionary biology of aging, sexual reproduction 
and DNA repair. Evolution 47: 1293 -1301  
30. Santos F, Dean W. (2004) Epigenetic reprogramming during early 
development in mammals. Reproduction 127: 643 -651 
31. Kemp CJ, Moore JM, Moser R, et al. (2014) CTCF haploinsufficiency 
destabilizes DNA methylation and predisposes to cancer. Cell Rep.7(4):102 0-9 
32. Choi JD, Lee JS.(2013) Interplay between Epigenetics and Genetics in 
Cancer. Genomics Inform. (4):164 -73 
33. Burger JM, Hwangbo DS, Corby -Harris V, et al. (2007) The functional 
costs and benefits of dietary restriction in Drosophila. Aging Cell 6(1 ):63-71 
34. Flatt T. Amdam GV. Kirkwood TB, et al. (2013) Life -history evolution and 
the polyphonic regulation of somatic maintenance and survival. Q Rev Biol 
88(3):185 -218 
35. Calvanese V, Lara E, Kahn A, et al. (2009) The role of epigenetics in aging 
and age-related diseases. Ageing Res Rev 8(4):268 -76 
36. Shannon CE (1948). A Mathematical Theory of Communication. Bell 
System Tech J 27 (3): 379 –423 
37. Heylighen F, Joslyn C. (2001) Cybernetics and Second Order Cybernetics, 
in: R.A. Meyers (ed.), Encyclope dia o f Physical Science & Technology , Vol. 4 
(3rd ed.), Academic Press, New York , p. 155 -170 
38. Branchi I, Karpova NN, D'Andrea I, et al. (2011) Epigenetic modifications 
induced by early enrichment are associated with changes in timing of induction 
of BDN F expression. Neurosci Lett 495(3):168 -72 
39. Ferris LT, Williams JS, Shen CL. (2007) The effect of acute exercise on 
serum brain -derived neurotrophic factor levels and cognitiv e function Med Sci 
Sports Exerc  39(4):728 -34 40. Raichlen DA, Polk JD. (2013) L inking brains and brawn: exercise and the 
evolution of human neurobiology. Proc Biol Sci, 280(1750):20122250  
41. Feng J, Fouse S, Fan G. (2007) Epigenetic regulation of neural gene 
expression and neuronal function. Pediatr Res 61(5 Pt 2):58R -63R 
42. Saxena  A, Jacobson J, Yamanashi W, et al.  (2003) A hypothetical 
mathematical construct explaining the mechanism of biological amplification in 
an experimental model utilizing picoTesla (PT) electromagnetic fields. Med 
Hypotheses 60(6):821 -39 
43.  Adorjan P1, Sc hwabe L, Wenning G, et al. (2002) Rapid adaptation to 
internal states as a coding strategy in visual cortex? Neuroreport 4;13(3):337 -42 
44. Fry RC, Rager JE, Bauer RN, et al. (2014) Air toxics and epigenetic effects: 
Ozone altered microRNAs in the sputum o f human subjects. Am J Physiol Lung 
Cell Mol Physiol  [Epub ahead of print]  
45.  Le TD, Liu L, Zhang J, et al.  (2014) From miRNA regulation to miRNA -
TF co -regulation: computational approaches and challenges. Brief Bioinform. 
pii: bbu023. [Epub ahead of pri nt] 
46. Dweep H, Georgiou GD, Gretz N, et al. (2013) CNVs -microRNAs 
interactions demonstrate unique characteristics in the human genome. An 
interspecies in silico analysis. PLoS One 8(12):e81204  
47. Heylighen F. Evolutionary psychology, in A. Michalos (ed. ) (2011): 
Encyclopedia of Quality of Life Research, Springer, Berlin  
48. Natt, D (2011) Heritable epigenetic changes to environmental challenges. 
Linkoping studies in science and technology, dissertation 1383, Linkoping 
University, Sweeden  
49. Thayer ZM, K uzawa CW. (2011) Biological memories of past 
environments: epigenetic pathways to health disparities. Epigenetics 6(7):798 -
803 
50. Gentilini D, Castaldi D, Mari D et al. (2012) Age -dependent skewing of X 
chromosome inactivation appears delayed in centenari ans' offspring. Is there a 
role for allelic imbalance in healthy aging and longevity? Aging Cell 11:277 -83 
51. Gentilini D,  Mari D, Castaldi D  et al. (2013). Role of epigenetics in human 
aging and longevity: genome -wide DNA methylation profile in centenari ans 
and centenarians' offspring. Age (Dordr) 35:1961 -73 52. Nikoletopoulou V, Kyriakakis E, Tavernarakis N. (2014) Cellular and 
molecular longevity pathways: the old and the new. Trends Endocrinol Metab 
25(4):212 -23 
53. Kyriazis M. (2014) Novel Approaches to an Old Problem: Insights, Theory 
and Practice for Eliminating Aging Current Aging Science 7, No. 1: 1  
54. The Transhumanist Reader: Classical and Contemporary Essays on the 
Science, Technology, and Philosophy of the Human Future, eds: More M, Vita -
More N. 2013, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester UK  
55. Iansiti M . (1995) Technology integration: Managing technological evolution 
in a complex environment. Research Policy 24; 521 -542 