Title: Investigating Immune System Aging: System Dynamics and Agent-Based
  Modeling
Abstract:   System dynamics and agent based simulation models can both be used to model
and understand interactions of entities within a population. Our modeling work
presented here is concerned with understanding the suitability of the different
types of simulation for the immune system aging problems and comparing their
results. We are trying to answer questions such as: How fit is the immune
system given a certain age? Would an immune boost be of therapeutic value, e.g.
to improve the effectiveness of a simultaneous vaccination? Understanding the
processes of immune system aging and degradation may also help in development
of therapies that reverse some of the damages caused thus improving life
expectancy. Therefore as a first step our research focuses on T cells; major
contributors to immune system functionality. One of the main factors
influencing immune system aging is the output rate of naive T cells. Of further
interest is the number and phenotypical variety of these cells in an
individual, which will be the case study focused on in this paper.

Full Text: Investigating Immune System Aging: System Dynamics and Agent-Based
Modeling
Grazziela P. Figueredo, Uwe Aickelin
IMA Research Group, Computer Science School, Nottingham University, Wollaton Road, Nottingham, NG8 1BB UK
gzf@cs.nott.ac.uk, uxa@cs.nott.ac.uk
Keywords: Immunosenescence, thymic output, naive T cell
dynamics, system dynamics, agent based simulation
Abstract
System dynamics and agent based simulation models can
both be used to model and understand interactions of enti-
ties within a population. Our modeling work presented here
is concerned with understanding the suitability of the differ-
ent types of simulation for the immune system aging prob-
lems and comparing their results. We are trying to answer
questions such as: How ﬁt is the immune system given a cer-
tain age? Would an immune boost be of therapeutic value,
e.g. to improve the effectiveness of a simultaneous vaccina-
tion? Understanding the processes of immune system aging
and degradation may also help in development of therapies
that reverse some of the damages caused thus improving life
expectancy. Therefore as a ﬁrst step our research focuses on
T cells; major contributors to immune system functionality.
One of the main factors inﬂuencing immune system aging is
the output rate of naive T cells. Of further interest is the num-
ber and phenotypical variety of these cells in an individual,
which will be the case study focused on in this paper.
1. INTRODUCTION
System dynamics (SD) is an approach to help understand
the behaviour of complex systems over time. It works with
feedback loops, stocks and ﬂows that help describe a sys-
tem’s nonlinearity. The methodology of developing SD mod-
els suggest some stages that should be accomplished in order
to reach the ﬁnal model. The ﬁrst stage is identiﬁcation of the
problem followed by development of a dynamic hypothesis
explaining its causes. The next stages are building the com-
putational model, testing, validation and implementation.
Agent based modelling (ABS) is concerned with models in
which agents interact with each other, with a view to observ-
ing their behaviors given changes to the environment.
This work compares SD and ABS immune system aging
models that involve interactions which inﬂuence the naive T
cell populations over time. The models are based on the math-
ematical equations deﬁned in [9]. In their work, Murray et al.
[9] propose a model with a set of equations to ﬁt observed
data and estimate the likely contribution of each of the naive
T cell repertoire maintenance method.In our work, we converted the original model into simula-
tions and observe other important points not explored in [9].
Our objective is to understand the suitability of simulation for
immune system aging problems. Moreover, we want to estab-
lish a comparison between the SD and ABS results, in terms
of accuracy and complexity. In order to understand the prob-
lem and how the model was created, some concepts involving
the aging of the immune system will be presented.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the
related work review, section 3 presents the immunological
concepts necessary for the understanding of the modelled
problem. Next, in Section 4, the conceptual and mathematical
model are presented. Sections 5 and 6 present, respectively,
the system dynamics and the agent based models, followed
by the results obtained, conclusions and next steps of this on-
going work.
2. RELATED WORK
In this section, we brieﬂy present some of the research lit-
erature related to the comparison of ABS with SD.
In [15], the authors show the application of both SD and
ABS to simulate non-equilibrium ligand-receptor dynamics
over a broad range of concentrations. They concluded that
both approaches are powerful tools and are also complemen-
tary. In addition, in their case study, they did not indicate a
preferred paradigm, although SD is an obvious choice when
studying systems at a high level of aggregation and abstrac-
tion, and ABS is well suited to studying phenomena at the
level of individual receptors and molecules.
In [11] the authors present a cross-study of SD and ABS.
They deﬁne their features and characteristics and contrast the
two methods. In addition they present ideas of how to in-
tegrate both approaches. The theoretical work presented by
[10] compares ABS and SD conceptually, and discusses the
potential synergy between them in order to solve problems of
teaching decision-making processes.
The work presented in [13] also compares these modelling
approaches and identify a list of likely opportunities for cross-
fertilization. The list presented is not exhaustive and should
be a starting point to other researchers to take such synergistic
views even further.
In our work, we intend to proceed with this investigation
using as case studies simulations related to the aging of thearXiv:1306.6206v1  [cs.CE]  26 Jun 2013immune system. In the next section we present concepts nec-
essary to understand our case study.
3. BACKGROUND
Aging is a complex process that negatively impacts on the
development of the immune system and its ability to func-
tion [1]. The changes that characterise the aging of the im-
mune system are called collectively immunosenescence orde-
crease in immunocompetence .
The decrease of immunocompetence in the elderly can be
envisaged as the result of the continuous challenge of the un-
avoidable exposure to a variety of viruses, bacteria, food and
other harmful substances [6]. These exposures cause persis-
tent life-long immune system stress, responsible for ﬁlling of
the “immunological space” by an accumulation of immune
cells and immune memory cells [6].
With age, there is also a signiﬁcant reduction of certain
speciﬁc kinds of immune cells, such as naive T cells, caused
by the shrinkage of the organ that generates them, i.e. the thy-
mus. Naive T cells are able to respond to novel pathogens that
the immune system has not yet encountered. Lower numbers
of these cells eventually leave the body more susceptible to
infectious and non-infections diseases [9].
Before 20 years of age, naive T cells are sustained primar-
ily from thymic output [9]. However, in middle age there is a
change in the source of naive T cells; as the thymus involutes,
there is considerable reduction in its T cell output. Thus, new
T cells are mostly produced by peripheral expansion. There
is also a belief that some memory cells have their phenotype
reverted back to naive cells [9]. Over time, the repertoire of
naive T cells shrinks proportionately to faced threats, while
memory increases [9] [8] [6].
Thus, late in life, the T cell population becomes less diverse
and a small number of antigen-speciﬁc T cell clones can grow
to a great percentage of the total T cell population. This takes
over the space needed for other T cells, resulting in a less di-
verse and ineffective immune system. Eventually, there might
be not enough naive T cells left to mount an effective defense
and the immunological space is ﬁlled with memory cells.
The aim of this work is to develop models consider-
ing each of the above characteristics in order to investigate
if these simulation techniques are suitable for investigating
the immunosenescence phenomenon. De Martinis [8] and
Franceschi [6] state that the most important characteristics of
immunosenescence are the accumulation of memory T cells,
reduction of naive T cells, shrinkage of the thymus and a ﬁll-
ing of immunological space.
As we can see from the above, one of the main fac-
tors in the process of immunosenescence is the number
and phenotypical variety of naive T cells in an individual,
which changes with age in quantity and diversity. Recent
research [2][5][7] suggests that population-based models ofT-cell repertoire evolution may guide new developments for
treating diseases and help the recovery of the system after de-
pletion caused by infections, radiation and age. These factors
inﬂuenced the choice of the simulation case study developed
in this research. Some work [14] has been done in simula-
tion to understand certain aspects of immunology and other
biological tissue patterns. However relatively little has been
done in terms of immune degradation. Hence, our concep-
tual model considers shrinkage of the thymus and depletion
of naive T cells, which will be explained in the next section.
4. THE MODEL
4.1. Naive T Cell Output
Thymic contribution in an individual are quantiﬁed by the
level of a biological marker called ‘T cell receptors excision
circle’ (TREC). TREC is circular DNA originated during the
formation of the T-cell receptor. The percentage of T cells
possessing TRECs decays with shrinkage of thymic output
and activation and reproduction of naive T cells [9]. This
means that naive T cells originating from the thymus have
a greater percentage of TREC than those originating through
other proliferation.
Our model proposed here is based on data and equations
obtained in [9], which is concerned with establishing an un-
derstanding naive T cell repertoire dynamics. The objective
of the model is to determine the likely contribution of each
of the naive T cell’s sources by comparing estimates of the
presence of TREC in the cells (see Figure 1). The dynamics
of the sustaining sources, i.e. naive proliferation, TREC and
reversal of memory to naive T cells are modelled mathemati-
cally.
Figure 1. Dynamics of Naive T cells.4.2. The Mathematical Model
The mathematical model proposed in [9] is described by
equations (1) to (6) below. In these equations, Nis the total
number of naive cells of direct thymic origin, Npis the num-
ber of naive cells that have undergone proliferation, Ais the
number of activated cells, Mis the number of memory cells
andtis time (in years). The ﬁrst differential equation is:
dN
dt=s0e ltts(Np) [ln+µng(Np)]N;(1)
where: s0is the thymic output; ltis the thymic decay rate;
s0e ltts(Np)represents the number of cells that arise from
the thymus where s(Np)is the rate of export of the thymus
deﬁned by:
s(Np) =1
1+¯sNp
¯Np(2)
Also, lnNrepresents the naive cells’ incorporation into the
naive proliferating pool where lnis the naive proliferation
rate; µnis the thymic naive cells death rate; µng(Np)Nrepre-
sents the naive cell death rate where the function g(Np)is the
death rate of between naive TREC-positive and naive TREC-
negative, deﬁned as:
g(Np) =1+bNp
¯Np
1+Np
¯Np;(3)
¯Npand ¯sare equilibrium and scaling values respectively.
The second differential equation is:
dNp
dt=lnN+[ch(N;Np) µn]Np+lmnM (4)
where: cis the proliferation rate; ch(N;Np)Nprepresents the
naive proliferation where h(N;Np)is the dilution of thymic-
naive through proliferation deﬁned by:
h(N;Np) =1
1+N+Np
¯Np(5)
µnNpis the death rate of proliferation-originated naive cells
andlmnis the reversion rate from memory into Np. The ﬁnal
differential equation is:
dM
dt=laA µmM lmnM:(6)
where: lais the reversion rate into memory and µmis the
death rate of memory cells. The parameter values for the
model’s can be seen in Table 1.
For the mathematical model and subsequent simulations,
s0=56615 and the active cells were obtained by a look-uprate value(s)
ltlog(2)
15:7(year 1)
ln 0.22, 2.1, 0.003
µn 4.4
c 0 (no proliferation) or µn(1+300
¯Np)
lmn 0
µm 0.05
la 0
Table 1. Rate values for the mathematical model.
table based on data collected by [3]. This table contains the
number of activated CD4 cells per mm3for early years. This
table was used as a stock for the active cells. From the active
cell stock we update the values of the memory cell stock.
Equations (1) to (6) will be incorporated in the SD and
ABS models in order to investigate if it is possible to repro-
duce and validate the results obtained in [9]. Moreover, vari-
ations of the ratio variables are investigated to understand the
importance of each individual integrand in the system. For
example, it is important to establish how much the prolifera-
tion rate impacts the depletion of naive T cells over age; also,
at which point in time can the system be deﬁned as losing
functionality.
5. THE SYSTEM DYNAMICS MODEL
The system dynamics model objective is to simulate the
processes involved in the maintenance of naive T cells. The
model was built taking into consideration all the interactions
described by the mathematical equations deﬁned in the pre-
vious section. The simulation was built using AnyLogic 6.5
University Edition [12].
The naive T cells, naive T cells from proliferation and
memory cells are stock variables. The stock variable that rep-
resents the number of naive T cells is subject to thymic out-
put, proliferation and death rates, which are ﬂow variables.
The ﬂows between naive cells and active cells are not deﬁned
in the mathematical model. Therefore we assume that these
ﬂows only interfere on the stock of active cells, which will not
be considered in the SD model. The number of active cells,
which is a stock, will be given by a look up table containing
real values of active cells in the organism. The graphical rep-
resentation of the stock of naive T cells and its ﬂows, which
corresponds to Equation 1 on the mathematical model, can be
seen in Figure 2.
The amount of naive cells from proliferation is changed
by death, proliferation and reversion from memory rates, ac-
cording to Equation 2. The memory repertoire is modiﬁed by
death and reversion to a naive phenotype (Equation 6). All
the stocks put together form the SD model and can be seen in
Figure 6.Figure 2. The naive T cell stock variable and its ﬂows:
thymic output, proliferation, activation and death.
Figure 3. The naive T cells from proliferation stock variable
and its ﬂows: death, activation, proliferation and memory re-
verted to naive.
Figure 4. The memory T cells stock variable and its ﬂows:
death and reversion to a naive phenotype.
6. THE AGENT BASED MODEL
The SD model was then converted into an ABS model
shown in Figure 7. T cells are the agents and the state chart
represents all the stages these agents can assume, i.e. naive,
naive from proliferation, active or memory cells. The agents’
state changes and their death rates are given by the ratios de-
ﬁned in the mathematical model. Initially all the agents are in
thenaive state. As the simulation proceeds they can assume
other stages according to the transition pathways deﬁned in
the state chart. The agents also reproduce, and the newborn
agents which are also T cells, should assume the same state
as their original agent.
At the beginning of the simulation, there are only agents in
theNaive state generated by thymic output. From the Naive
state, the agents can proliferate and go to the NaiveProlifera-
tionstate. If the T cells in the NaiveProliferation state repro-
duce according to the NaiveProliferationRate , more agents
will be generated in the same state ( NaiveProliferation ) as
their progenitors. The same thing happens to the state Mem-
ory. The agents can also die according to speciﬁc rates, de-
termined by the mathematical model. The agents in this sim-
ulation respond to changes in time and do not interact with
each other directly. Therefore, what we intended to get from
Figure 5. The system dynamics model’s functions and pa-
rameters. The function RealActives returns the values for ac-
tive CD4+ cells at a certain time. The parameters NPActi-
vationRate, NPActivation, NPDeathRate, MemoryToNP and
MemoryToNPRate correspond to naive cells from prolifera-
tion (NP).
this simulation is the response of each individual cell to the
proposed environment.
Figure 6. The ABS model. In this simulation, The number
of active agents is also given by a look up table.7. EXPERIMENTS
We study three simulation scenarios deﬁned by [9] with
different values for the parameters. A summary of parameters
changed for each scenario can be seen in Table 2.
One of the case study simulation’s objectives is to inves-
tigate if there is the need for naive peripheral proliferation
throughout life. Therefore, for the ﬁrst scenario the naive pe-
ripheral proliferation rate is set to zero. It also considers re-
version from memory to a naive phenotype.
The second scenario assumes peripheral proliferation with
a bigger rate of naive cells becoming naive proliferating cells
(2.1): There is no reversion from memory to a naive phe-
notype and no homeostatic reduction in thymic export. The
functions s,gandhfrom the mathematical model are re-
sponsible for controlling the thymic export, naive death rate
and naive peripheral proliferation, respectively. In order to
alter the thymic export, the parameters sandNphave been
changed. The parameter bwas set to zero so that the function
gwould remain constant during all the simulation and so the
death rate of naive cells.
The third scenario alters the function gover time by set-
ting the parameter bgreater than zero ( b=4:2). This means
that the death rate of naive T cells from thymus will increase
along the years as the number of naive from peripheral prolif-
eration increases. There is no change of the thymic export, no
reversion from memory to a naive phenotype and the conver-
sion rate of naive from thymus to naive proliferation is low
(equal to 0.003).
The data used for validation of the mathematical model and
the simulations is displayed in Table 3. The data set contains
information about the TREC marker in individuals grouped
in age ranges. The ﬁrst column of Table 3 shows the age
range of the individuals; the second column has the mean
log10T REC
106PBMC (peripheral blood mononuclear cell) and the
third column contains the number of individuals in each age
range. The total number of individuals in the experiment was
506. The graphic containing the TREC data (naive from thy-
mus) and total naive cell data provided by [4] is shown in
Figure 8.
Each simulation was run for a period of one hundred years
considering the impact of thymic shrinkage per mm3of pe-
ripheral blood and 3673 initial naive cells from thymus for
the SD model.
8. RESULTS
The SD simulation results for the ﬁrst scenario can be seen
in Figure 9. The ABS results are shown in Figure 10. The re-
sults for both simulation techniques show a very similar trend
curve, although the ABS results exhibit a more noisy behavior
in time. For this ﬁrst scenario, the simulation results did notAgelog10T REC
106nPBMCnumber of individuals
0 5.03 48
1-4 4.93 53
5-9 4.86 19
10-14 4.86 19
15-19 4.56 33
20-24 3.88 26
25-29 3.75 47
30-34 3.61 65
35-39 3.54 73
40-44 3.52 52
45-49 3.37 55
50-54 3.17 16
Table 3. The dataset used for validation obtained in [9].
0 2 0 4 0 6 0 8 0 1 0 001 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 01 0 0N a i v e %
Y e a r sO r i g i n a l d a t a c o l l e c t e d f o r v a l i d a t i o n
N a i v e % C D 4 + d a t a
L o g 1 0 p e r c e n t a g e T c e l l s f r o m t h y m u s
Figure 7. The dataset used for validation was provided by
[9] and [4]. The data represented by the symbol is the TREC
data shown in Table 3 and represents the total percentage of
CD4+.
ﬁt the original data. The naive cells from thymus curve pro-
duced shows a big decay in thymic export on the beginning
of life because of the high death rate.
After the twenties, an exponential decay of thymic export is
observed and the dynamics follows the thymic decay rate rule
deﬁned in the mathematical model. The naive proliferation
curve increases with the decrease of naive from thymus, but
as there is no proliferation of peripheral cells, they die with
no replacement. Thus they follow the same pattern of their
only source, i.e. thymic naive cells. The results indicate that
peripheral proliferation is important for maintenance of naive
T cells.
For scenario 2, results match the original data more closely
than in the previous scenario. In this case peripheral prolifera-
tion is considered as well as a high rate of naive cells from the
thymus turning into peripheral naive cells. Figure 11 showsScenario Description Parameters
1 No peripheral proliferation c=0;ln=0:22;lmn=0:05;Np=387 ;s=0:48;b=3:4;µNp=0:13
2 No homeostatic reduction in thymic export, s=0;b=0;ln=2:1;lmn=0;Np=713
no homeostatic alteration of naive death rate
3 Homeostatic alteration of naive death rate s=0;ln=0:003 ;lmn=0;Np=392 ;b=4:2
but not thymic export
Table 2. Simulation parameters for different scenarios.
the results for SD and Figure 12 for ABS. The naive from
thymus curve shows a big decay in the beginning of life be-
cause of the death and proliferation rates. On the other hand,
the naive from proliferation curve increases with the decrease
of the naive from thymus curve. This pattern is controlled by
thegfunction.
The main difference between these results and results form
the previous scenario is that the amount of naive cells from
proliferation reaches a stable value after the age of twenty
with no further decay. The results indicate the importance of
peripheral expansion, but the need of a smaller rate of naive to
peripheral naive conversion. Moreover, reversion from mem-
ory is not important.
Scenario 3 takes into account the results produced in the
previous scenarios and adjusts the parameters in a way that
a more accurate output is obtained. The results for SD and
ABS can be seen in Figures 13 and 14, respectively. The naive
from thymus curve presents a decay at the beginning of life
followed by an interval of stability ruled by s0. By the age of
twenty the thymic export decreases in an exponential trend.
With the decay of naive from thymus, the naive repertoire
changes from the thymic source to peripheral proliferation
source. Therefore, by performing these simulations it is pos-
sible to have an idea of how the decay of naive cells happens
over time. The results now closely match the original data.
0 2 0 4 0 6 0 8 0 1 0 001 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 01 0 0N a i v e %
Y e a r sR e s u l t s f o r t h e m a t h e m a t i c a l a n d S D m o d e l − s c e n a r i o 1
T o t a l T c e l l s
N a i v e T c e l l s
N a i v e f r o m p r o l i f e r a t i o n
N a i v e % C D 4 + d a t a
L o g 1 0 p e r c e n t a g e T c e l l s f r o m t h y m u s
Figure 8. Results for scenario 1 with SD.
0 2 0 4 0 6 0 8 0 1 0 001 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 01 0 0N a i v e %
Y e a r sR e s u l t s f o r t h e A B S m o d e l − s c e n a r i o 1
T o t a l T c e l l s
N a i v e T c e l l s
N a i v e f r o m p r o l i f e r a t i o n
N a i v e % C D 4 + d a t a
L o g 1 0 p e r c e n t a g e T c e l l s f r o m t h y m u sFigure 9. Results for scenario 1 with ABS.
0 2 0 4 0 6 0 8 0 1 0 001 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 01 0 0N a i v e %
Y e a r sR e s u l t s f o r t h e m a t h e m a t i c a l a n d S D m o d e l − s c e n a r i o 2
T o t a l T c e l l s
N a i v e T c e l l s
N a i v e f r o m p r o l i f e r a t i o n
N a i v e % C D 4 + d a t a
L o g 1 0 p e r c e n t a g e T c e l l s f r o m t h y m u s
Figure 10. Results for scenario 2 with SD.
For the three scenarios studied, the simulations produced
similar results for both SD and ABS techniques matching the
original data. Hence, it is possible to conclude that the math-
ematical model, as well as immunosenescence problems are
suitable for simulation using both techniques. The differences
between the SD and ABS simulations are in how the concep-
tual model is represented and manipulated.
SD gives a systemic view of the conceptual model and tries0 2 0 4 0 6 0 8 0 1 0 001 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 01 0 0N a i v e %
Y e a r sR e s u l t s f o r t h e A B S m o d e l − s c e n a r i o 2
T o t a l T c e l l s
N a i v e T c e l l s
N a i v e f r o m p r o l i f e r a t i o n
N a i v e % C D 4 + d a t a
L o g 1 0 p e r c e n t a g e T c e l l s f r o m t h y m u sFigure 11. Results for scenario 2 with ABS.
0 2 0 4 0 6 0 8 0 1 0 001 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 01 0 0N a i v e %
Y e a r sR e s u l t s f o r t h e m a t h e m a t i c a l a n d S D m o d e l − s c e n a r i o 3
T o t a l T c e l l s
N a i v e T c e l l s
N a i v e f r o m p r o l i f e r a t i o n
N a i v e % C D 4 + d a t a
L o g 1 0 p e r c e n t a g e T c e l l s f r o m t h y m u s
Figure 12. Results for scenario 3 with SD.
0 2 0 4 0 6 0 8 0 1 0 001 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 01 0 0N a i v e %
Y e a r sR e s u l t s f o r t h e A B S m o d e l − s c e n a r i o 3
T o t a l T c e l l s
N a i v e T c e l l s
N a i v e f r o m p r o l i f e r a t i o n
N a i v e % C D 4 + d a t a
L o g 1 0 p e r c e n t a g e T c e l l s f r o m t h y m u s
Figure 13. Results for scenario 3 with ABS.to forecast how the system as a whole would evolve in time in
an aggregate manner. This means that each change ratio will
be applied to the entire set of cells. One could argue that SD
represent an idealised version of the system.
In the ABS model, cells are subject to individual rates that
occur during the time slice they were created in. This makes
the output more noisy than the SD results. It also seems to
be more realistic, because in real immune systems, cells have
individual behaviours and responses to the environment. In
addition, the ABS model is easier to adapt to changes in the
conceptual model, such as when change rates occur during a
cell’s life span or new cellular interactions between cells.
We also believe that the individual cellular behavior could
be captured in a more simpliﬁed mathematical model. For ex-
ample, the s,gandhfunctions’ control could be incorporated
in the way cells change over time. This would help to further
understand the biological system behavior. On the other hand,
SD is simpler to implement and demands less computational
resources such as memory, processing time and complexity
as it can be seen in the comparison of Tables 4 and 5. The
precision measure on the table is the sum of the square errors
(SSE) of the percentages of naive T cells from thymus. The
best results are given by the smaller numbers of SSE. The
other measurements are time in seconds and memory usage
in megabytes. The numbers for the system dynamics are bet-
ter in terms of resources consumption as well as precision.
We believe that precision for the ABS was not better because
of the instabilities that occurred in the resulting graphs.
Scenario Time (sec) RAM SSE
1 0.7 11 71696
2 0.8 11 5924.4
3 0.7 10 589.9
Table 4. SD processing time, memory usage and precision.
Scenario Time (sec) RAM (MB) SSE
1 28800 40 10349
2 61700 50 20668
3 64800 50 45834
Table 5. ABS processing time, memory usage and precision.
9. CONCLUSIONS
Understanding immunosenescence and its causes may help
direct research into therapies that reverse some of its con-
sequences and improve life expectancy. The research ques-
tion raised within this work focuses on the feasibility of us-
ing SD and ABS simulation tools to understand immune sys-
tem aging and comparing the two strategies. The ability to
model immune system aging will provide new means to de-
ﬁne a patient-speciﬁc ‘Immune Risk Phenotype’. Modellingthis Risk Type will improve our knowledge of immune fac-
tors that contribute to morbidity and mortality and facilitate
the design of appropriate interventions.
The main factors inﬂuencing the process of immunosenes-
cence include the number and phenotypical variety of naive T
cells in an individual, which change with age in quantity and
diversity. At the beginning of life, the thymus is the principal
source of naive T cells. With age, there is a decay in thymus
output and a shift between the main source of naive T cells.
It is believed that the sustenance of naive T cells in the or-
ganism is provided by peripheral expansion, reversion from
a memory phenotype, and long-lived T cells. Data related to
thymic output rate was collected by [9] and a mathematical
model was build. This mathematical model was used as the
baseline for the development of SD and ABS models.
Three simulation scenarios were studied and the simulation
outputs were broadly similar for both SD and ABS. Hence, it
is possible to conclude that the mathematical model, as well
as immunosenescence problems are suitable for simulation
using both techniques. The differences between the SD and
ABS outputs are in how the conceptual model is represented
and manipulated.
The SD based simulation is closer to the underlying math-
ematics, but has the disadvantage of being high-level, with
complete homogeneity of simulated entities. On the other
hand, ABS allowed a representation of each entity and het-
erogeneity. However, ABS increases the demand for compu-
tational resources.
As future work, it is intended to build a framework to de-
velop immunosenescence simulation models. We also want
to deﬁne guidelines to help decide when each simulation type
should be used in an immunosenescence model.
Finally, we are interested to investigate how combining
ABS and SD models could help improving the simulations.
As we have shown, immunosenescence can be simulated by
more than one simulation type, however our hypothesis is that
a combination of methodologies will provide higher predic-
tion accuracy given the same amount of input data and com-
putational resources.
REFERENCES
[1] Matteo Bulatti, Mariavaleria Pellican `o, Sonya Vasto, and
Guiseppina Colonna-Romano. Understanding ageing:
Biomedical and bioengineering approaches, the immunologic
view. Immunity & Ageing , 5(9), september 2008.
[2] Michael P. Cancro, Yi Hao, Jean L. Scholz, Richard L. Ri-
ley, Daniela Frasca, Deborah K. Dunn-Walters, and Bonnie B.
Blomberg. B cells and aging: molecules and mechanisms.
Trends in Immunology , 30(7):313–318, July 2009.
[3] W. Marieke Comans-Bitter, Ronald de Groot, and Ren ´e
van den Beemd. Immunophenotyping of blood lymphocytes in
childhood. reference values for lymphocites subpopulations. J.
Pediatr. , (130):388–393, 1997.[4] Andrea Cossarizza, Claudio Ortolani, Roberto Paganelli,
Daniela Barbieri, Daniela Monti, Paolo Sansoni, Umberto Fa-
giolo, Gastone Castellani, Ferdinando Bersani, Marco Londei,
and Claudio Franceschi. CD45 isoforms expression on CD4+
and CD8+ T cells throughout life, from newborns to centenar-
ians: implications for T cell memory. Mechanisms of Ageing
and Development , 86(3):173 – 195, 1996.
[5] Mark R. Dowling and Philip D. Hodgkin. Why does the thy-
mus involute? a selection-based hypothesis. Trends in Im-
munology , 30(7):295–300, July 2009.
[6] Claudio Franceschi, Massimiliano Bonaf `e, and Silvana
Valensin. Human immonosenescence: the prevailing of innate
immunity, the failing of clonotypic immunity, and the ﬁlling of
immunological space. Vaccine , 18:1717–1720, 2000.
[7] Elizabeth J. Kovacs, Jessica L. Palmer, Carl F. Fortin,
Tamas Fulop Jr, Daniel R. Goldstein, and Phyllis-Jean Linton.
Aging and innate immunity in the mouse: impact of intrinsic
and extrinsic factors. Trends in Immunology , 30(7):319–324,
July 2009.
[8] Massimo De Martinis, Claudio Franceschi, Daniela Monti,
and Lia Ginaldi. Inﬂamm-ageing and lifelong antigenic load
as major determinants of ageing rate and longevity. FEBS ,
579:2035–2039, february 2005.
[9] John M. Murray, Gilbert R. Kaufmann, Philip D. Hodgkin,
Sharon R. Lewin, Anthony D. Kelleher, Miles P. Davenport,
and John Zaunders. Naive T cells are maintained by thymic
output in early ages but by proliferation without phenotypic
change after twenty. Immunology and Cell Biology , 81:487–
495, June 2003.
[10] John Pourdehnad, Kambiz Maani, and Habib Sedehi. System
dynamics and intelligent agent based simulation: where is the
synergy? In Proceedings of the XX International Conference
of the System Dynamics society. , 2002.
[11] Nadine Schieritz and Peter M. Milling. Modeling the forrest
or modeling the trees: A comparison of system dynamics and
agent based simulation. In Proceedings of the XXI Interna-
tional Conference of the System Dynamics society. , 2003.
[12] XJ Technologies Simulation Software and Services.
Anylogic Muti-Method Simulation Tool , Available:
http://www.xjtek.com/anylogic/download/, Last accessed
02 Jun 2010.
[13] Luminita Stemate, Ivan Taylor, and Codrin Pasca. A com-
parison between system dynamics and agent based modeling
and opportunities for cross-fertilization. In Proceedings of
the 2007 Winter Simulation Conference . S. G. Henderson, B.
Biller, M.-H. Hsieh, J. Shortle, J. D. Tew, and R. R. Barton,
2007.
[14] Bryan C. Thorne, Alexander M. Bailey, and Shayn M. Peirce.
Combining experiments with multi-cell agent-based modelling
to study biological tissue patterning. Brieﬁngs in Bioinformat-
ics, 8(4):245–257, may 2007.
[15] Wayne W. Wakeland, Edward J. Gallaher, Louis M. Macov-
sky, and C. Athena Aktipis. A comparison of system dynamics
and agent-based simulation applied to the study of cellular re-
ceptor dynamics. Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences , 3:30086b, 2004.