Title: Magnetic Resonance Elastography and Portal Hypertension: Influence of
  the Portal Venous Flow on the Liver Stiffness
Abstract:   The invasive measurement of the hepatic venous pressure gradient is still
considered as the reference method to assess the severity of portal
hypertension. Even though previous studies have shown that the liver stiffness
measured by elastography could predict portal hypertension in patients with
chronic liver disease, the mechanisms behind remain today poorly understood.
The main reason is that the liver stiffness is not specific to portal
hypertension and is also influenced by concomitant pathologies, such as
cirrhosis. Portal hypertension is also source of a vascular incidence, with a
substantial diversion of portal venous blood to the systemic circulation,
bypassing the liver. This study focuses on this vascular effect of portal
hypertension. We propose to generate and control the portal venous flow (to
isolate the modifications in the portal venous flow as single effect of portal
hypertension) in an anesthetized pig and then to quantify its implications on
liver stiffness by an original combination of MRE and 4D-Flow Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI). A catheter balloon is progressively inflated in the
portal vein and the peak flow, peak velocity magnitude and liver stiffness are
quantified in a 1.5T MRI scanner (AREA, Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany).
A strong correlation is observed between the portal peak velocity magnitude,
the portal peak flow or the liver stiffness and the portal vein intraluminal
obstruction. Moreover, the comparison of mechanical and flow parameters
highlights a correlation with the possibility of identifying linear
relationships. These results give preliminary indications about how liver
stiffness can be affected by portal venous flow and, by extension, by
hypertension.

Full Text: 1 
 
1Corresponding author. E-mail address: schatelin@unistra.fr (S. Chatelin)        - Diffusion non restreinte  Magnetic Resonance Elastography  and Portal Hypertension : 
Influence of the Portal Venous Flow on the Liver Stiffness  
Simon CHATELINa,1, Raoul POPb,c, Céline GIRAUDEAUb, Khalid AMBARKId, Ning JINe, 
François SEVERACa,f, Elodie BRETONa and Jonathan VAPPOUa 
a ICube, CNRS UMR 7357, University of Strasbourg, IHU, Strasbourg, France  
b IHU-Strasbourg, Institute for Image -Guided Surgery, Strasbourg, France  
c University Hospital of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France  
d Siemens Healthcare SAS, Saint Denis, France  
e Siemens Medical Solutions, Chicago, IL, USA  
f Laboratory of Biostatistics and Medical Computer Science, School of Medicine, University Hospital of 
Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France  
 
Abstract . The invasive measurement of the hepatic venou s pressure gradient is still 
considered as the reference method to assess the severity  of portal hypertension. Even though 
previous studies have shown that the liver stiffness measured by elastography could predict 
portal hypertension in patients with chronic liver disease , the mechanisms behind remain today 
poorly understood. The main reas on is that the liver stiffness is not specific to portal 
hypertension and is also influenced by concomitant pathologies, such as cirrhosis. Portal 
hypertension is also source of a vascular incidence, with a substantial diversion of portal 
venous blood to t he systemic circulation, bypassing the liver. This study focuses on this 
vascular effect of portal hypertension. We propose to generate and control the portal venous 
flow (to isolate the modifications in the portal venous flow  as single effect of portal 
hypertension ) in an anesthetized pig and then to quantify its implications on liver stiffness by 
an original combination of MRE and 4D -Flow Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). A catheter 
balloon is progressively inflated in the portal vein and the peak flow , peak velocity magnitude  
and liver stiffness  are quantified in a 1.5T MRI scanner (AREA, Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, 
Germany). A strong correlation is observed  between the portal peak velocity magnitude, the 
portal peak flow or the liver stiffness and the portal vein intraluminal obstruction. Moreover, the 
comparison of mechanical and flow parameters highlights a correlation with the possibility of 
identifying linear relationships. These results give preliminary indications about how liver 
stiffness can be affected by portal venous flow and, by extension, by hypertension.  
 
Keywords . Portal Venous Flow ; Liver Stiffness ; Portal Hypertension ; 4D-Flow M RI; Magnetic 
Resonance Elastography ; 4D-Flow MRI  
 
1. Introduction  
 
In healthy volunteers, the portal vein represents about 8 7% of the  total liver inflow [1], as 
illustrated in the figure 1 . As a major consequence of chronic liver disease, portal hypertension 
is responsible for significant morbidity and mortality [2]. To the best of our knowledge and 
despite its invasiveness, the measurement of the hepatic venous pressure gradient i s still 
considered as the reference method to assess the severity  of portal hypertension [3]–[5]. The 
hepatic  venous pressure gradient is an important indicator for the decision for portal vein 
embolization and thus to reduce the risk of liver failure after hepatic tumor resection.  Portal 
hypertension  is not only characterized by an increase of hepatic venous pressure gradient  but 
is also source of  vascular effects, with  a substantial diversion of portal venous blood to the 
systemic circulation, bypassing the liver [6]. Cirrhosis and non -cirrhotic portal fibrosis are 
important causes for portal hypertension. During the last decade, elastography has been 
proposed as a noninvasive alternative to the measurement of hepatic venous pressure 
gradient  for de tecting the severity of portal hypertension  with clinical usefulness [7]–[10]. 
Especially in case of severe degree, portal hypertension  has been shown to be related on the 
amount of portal blood inflow [11], [12] . Previous stud ies have shown that the mechanical 
properties (at first the liver stiffness) accurately predicts portal hypertension  in patients with 
chronic liver disease, with comparable performance  to the  hepatic venous pressure gradient  
[8], [10] . 2 
Diffusion non restreinte   
Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the portal and hepatic vascular system. (sources for the human 
healthy flow values: [1: [1]] [2: [13]]) 
However, little is know n about the relationship  between venous pressure and the liver 
mechanical properties - mainly limited to systematic reviews and meta -analysis [12] - and 
remain stil l today poorly understood, despite an obvious correlation [13]. The main reason is 
that most of the commercial and experimental elastography imaging systems estimate liver 
stiffness  as a mechani cal parameter, which is correlated but not specific to portal hypertension  
and at the same time  influenced by several pathologies, such as liver fibrosis and cirrhosis 
[14], [15] .  
This study aims at generating and isolating the modifications in the portal venous  flow as a 
single effect of portal hypertension  to highlight their influence on liver stiffness . Instead of 
studying  correlations between liver stiffness  and portal hypertension  in heathy and pathological 
cohorts, we propose to control the portal venous flow (using an inflatable balloon cathe ter) and 
to quantify its effects on both  the portal flow characteristics and the  liver stiffness  by the original 
combination  of 4D-Flow Magnetic Resonance Imaging (4D -Flow MRI)  and Magnetic 
Resonance Elastography (MRE).  
 
2. Material s and Methods  
 
To isolate the modifications in the portal venous flow  as single effect of portal hypertension, 
the portal venous flow is controlled,  quantif ied and the effects  on liver stiffness  are investigated 
by an original combination of MRE and 4D-Flow MRI .  
The tests are performed on 1 female pig weighting 2 7 kg. Anesthesia is achieved using 
intravenous Zoletil ( 20cc, Virbac, Carros, France ) and then maintained using uniform 
ventilation (except during MRI sequences requiring breath holding) with 2% isoflurane ( Forene, 
AbbVie, North Chicago, IL, USA ). The experiments are performed in agreement with the 
European Community Council Directive of 22. September 2010 ( 010/63/U E) and the French 
local ethics committee ( protocol 38.2018.01.103 - APAFIS #14092 -2018031513247711 v1 ). 
The p ortal venous flow is controlled by partial or complete occlusion of the portal vein using 
a MR-compatible  balloon catheter ( XXLTM Vascular, Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, 
USA), with 9 mm in diameter and 40 mm in length.  Using fluoroscopic guidance, the balloon 
catheter is advanced in the main trunk of the portal vein. Balloon inflation is first performed 
under fluoroscopy in order to determine t he inflation volume necessary for varying degrees of 
portal occlusion. A 1:1 contrast (Visipaque 270, GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, United 
Kingdom) saline solution is used for balloon inflation.  
The catheter balloon is progressively inflated in the portal vein and the flow and mechanical  
parameters are quantified  in vivo  in a 1.5T interventional MRI scanner ( MAGNETOM Aera, 
Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany ). The protocol is divided in five suc cessive blocs  
(steps) , each one of them corresponding to a specific inflation of the balloon in the portal vein: 
0%, 50%, 80%, 0% and 100% of intraluminal sectional obstruction of the portal vein, 
3 
  Diffusion non restreinte  successively . Each bloc (step) is composed of 4 different MRI sequences acquired in a 1.5T  
MAGNETOM  Aera MRI interventional scanner (Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany) and 
corresponding to:  
(1) The validation of the position  of the field -of-view (FOV) on low resolution anatomical 
coronal images  (T1 VIBE sequence , hold breathing, TR/TE = 4.72/2.18  ms, FOV 
243 mm x 300 mm, matrix 156  x 256, 72 slices, slice thickness 2  mm). 
(2) The measurement of the liver stiffness  (MRE gradient recalled echo (GRE) sequence 
with motion sensitizing gradients , hold breathing, TR/TE = 50/23.75  ms, FOV 
239 mm x 300 mm, matrix 204 x 256, 3 slices, slice thickness 5 mm). The stiffness maps  are 
obtained using a local estimation algorithm in a 3D region of interest over  the 3 coronal slices.  
(3) The portal venous flow characterization by the quantitative 3D investigation  over time of 
the peak flow and the peak velocity magnitude in the portal vein . The acquisitions are 
performed using the prototype  4D-Flow pulse sequence [16] (Siemens Health care, Erlangen, 
Germany)  (free breathing and respiratory gating, TR/TE = 51.68/3.77  ms, FOV 
284 mm x 414 mm, matrix 106  x 192, 20 slices, slice thickness 2 .5 mm, 11 time frames, 
encoding velocity 50  cm.s-1 for all directions, TT  = 20 to 440 by 52.5 steps for 9 temporal 
frames ). The post -treatment  and the flow parameters quantif ication are performed  using the 
prototype “ 4DFlow v2.4 ” WIP software (Siemens Healthcar e, Erlangen, Germany)  with phase 
anti-aliasing and motion tracking filtering before flow quantifications.    
(4) The precise measurement of the balloon  and portal vein dimensions  using high 
resolution anatomical coronal images  (prototype sequence: SPIRAL VIBE sequence , free 
breathing, TR/TE = 4.57/0.05  ms, FOV 300  mm x 300 mm, matrix 288  x 288, 176 slices, slice 
thickness 1  mm).  
The respiratory synchronization of the MRI sequences  is ensured using MR-compatible 
electrocardiogram. The angiography  image  with 80% inflated balloon  (A), 4D-Flow image (B) , 
MRE stiffness map  (C) and SPIRAL VIBE anatomical image (D) are shown in figure  2. 
 
 
Figure 2. A catheter balloon is  inserted in the portal vein under angiography (A)  and then successively 
inflated at 0%, 50%, 80%, 0% and 100% intraluminal sectional occlusion of the vein . The  portal venous  
flow (B) and liver mechanical (C ) parameters are successively measured  for each occlusion state  using 
4D-Flow MRI and MRE imag ing. Spiral VIBE MRI sequence image s and measure s the precise 
dimensions of the balloon  (D). 
 
3. Results  and discussions  
 
From the  SPIRAL VIBE  MRI images, the successive intraluminal sectional vein occlusions  are 
investigated by the measurement of both the inflated catheter balloon and the portal vein 
diameter . With successive values of 0.6  mm, 7.9 mm, 5.8 mm, 0.6 mm, 9.1 mm and 8.7  mm, 
8.9 mm, 7.9 mm, 8.7 mm, 9.1 mm for the balloon and portal vein diameter, respectively, the 
theoretical successive sectional obstruction values of 0%, 80%, 50%, 0% and 100% are 
adjusted to 0.4%, 79.8%, 52.5%, 0.4% and 100.0% real successive occlusion values.  
The in sertion of the catheter balloon is thought to modify the vascular flow and velocity, first 
of all in the portal vein. As illustrated in figure 3(A), a  significant correlation appears between 
the portal peak flow  and the inflation state of the balloon . Similarly, the portal peak velocity 
magnitude is correlated to the occlusion of the portal vein. Otherwise, this trend is not observed 
in the cava vein  (figure 3(B)) . In the cava vein, the velocity and flow parameters decrease 
4 
Diffusion non restreinte  slowly and constantl y over the experiments,  independent ly of the inflation of the catheter 
balloon.  The experimental conditions, and above all to the anesthesia , could explain this slow 
and regular flow decrease in the cava vein [17], [18] . These observation s validate the specificity 
of our results to the portal vascular system.  
 
 
Figure 3. The portal (A) and cava vein (B) flow parameters are quantified using 4D -Flow imaging over 
portal vein intraluminal occlusion (peak velocity magnitude and peak flow in purple squares  and red 
circles , respectively). The liver stiffness (C) is measured using MRE over portal vein intraluminal 
occlusion (in green diamond shape ). The investigation of the liver stiffness as a function of portal peak 
flow (D) and portal peak velocity magnitude (E) indicates  a linear relationship.  
 
From the MRE measurements, a similar trend as for portal peak flow or portal peak velocity 
magnitude over portal occlusion state can be observed for liver stiffness (figure 3(C)). This 
result illustrates a direct influence of the p ortal flow obstruction on the liver mechanical 
properties measured by elastography.  
The liver stiffness is observed as a function of the portal venous peak flow  and portal peak 
velocity magnitude, as reported in the  figure s 3 (D) and  (E), respectively . The individual 
correlation s between the liver stiffness and flow parameters  are performed using  non-
parametric  Spearman’s rs rank correlation coefficients to investigate  potential  monotonic 
relationship s. A significant correlation is observed , with the possibility of identifying linear 
relationships, as attested by the correlation coefficient close of 0.87 and 0.97 for peak flow and 
peak velocity magnitude, respectively . These  linear  relationships are identified for this single 
animal as:  
 
      µ[𝑃𝑎]=12.8 x PF[mL/s] + 1923            and        µ[Pa] = 11.3 x PVM [mL/s] + 1884  
 
µ, PF and PVM are the liver stiffness (from MRE measurements), the portal peak flow and the 
portal peak velocity magnitude (from 4D -Flow MRI measurements), respectivel y. 
 
4. Conclusions  
 
The results and conclusions of this preliminary study are limited by the observation of a case -
specific single subject  and could be strengthened by increasing the cohort  to a complete 
prospective study . Nevertheless, t hese preliminary results are already thought to give 
indications about how liver stiffness  can be affected by portal inflow alterations and so by portal 
hypertension . They contribute to give information about the effect, which would affect the 
elastography measurements of the liver in clinical practice. Otherwise, this study provides 
unprecedented  in vivo  information for the mechanical modeling of the liver including 
mechanical properties and vascular flows . 
 
5 
  Diffusion non restreinte  Acknowledgements  
 
The authors thank Thomas Benkert ( Siemens Healthcare GmbH, Germany ) for provided the 
prototype SPIRAL VIBE sequence.  
 
Fundings  
 
This work was supported by French state funds managed by the ANR ( Agence Nationale de 
la Recherche ) within the Investissements d’Avenir program for the IHU Strasbourg ( IHU 
Strasbourg, Institut Hospitalo -Universitaire, Institute of Image Guided Surgery, ANR -10-IAHU -
02). 
 
References   
 
[1] A. Roldán -Alzate, A. Frydrychowicz, E. Niespodzany, B. R. Landgraf, K. M. Johnson, O. Wieben, 
and S. B. Reeder, “In vivo validation of 4D flow MRI for assessing the hemodynamics of portal 
hypertension,” J. Magn. Reson. Imaging , vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 1100 –1108, May 2013.  
[2] M. Y. Kim, M. Y. Cho, S. K. Baik, H. J. Park, H. K. Jeon, C. K. Im, C. S. Won, J. W. Kim, H. S. Kim, 
S. O. Kwon, M. S. Eom, S. H. Cha, Y. J. Kim, S. J. Chang, and S. S. Lee, “Histological 
subclassification of cirrhosis using the Laennec fibrosis scoring system correlates with clinical stage 
and grade of portal hypertension,” J. Hepatol. , vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1004 –1009, 2011.  
[3] D. Lebrec, P. Sogni, and V. Vilgrain, “2 Evaluation of patients w ith portal hypertension,” Baillieres. 
Clin. Gastroenterol. , vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 221 –241, 1997.  
[4] T. F. Imperiale, N. Chalasani, and R. W. Klein, “Measuring the hemodynamic response to primary 
pharmacoprophylaxis of variceal bleeding: a cost -effectiveness  analysis,” Am. J. Gastroenterol. , 
vol. 98, no. 12, pp. 2742 –2750, 2003.  
[5] E. Boleslawski, G. Petrovai, S. Truant, S. Dharancy, A. Duhamel, J. Salleron, P. Deltenre, G. 
Lebuffe, P. Mathurin, and F. R. Pruvot, “Hepatic venous pressure gradient in the asse ssment of 
portal hypertension before liver resection in patients with cirrhosis,” Br. J. Surg. , vol. 99, no. 6, pp. 
855–863, 2012.  
[6] A. Berzigotti, S. Seijo, U. Arena, J. G. Abraldes, F. Vizzutti, J. C. García -Pagán, M. Pinzani, and J. 
Bosch, “Elastograp hy, spleen size, and platelet count identify portal hypertension in patients with 
compensated cirrhosis,” Gastroenterology , vol. 144, no. 1, pp. 102 -111.e1, 2013.  
[7] J. A. Carrión, M. Navasa, J. Bosch, M. Bruguera, R. Gilabert, and X. Forns, “Transient el astography 
for diagnosis of advanced fibrosis and portal hypertension in patients with hepatitis C recurrence 
after liver transplantation,” Liver Transplant. , vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 1791 –1798, 2006.  
[8] F. Vizzutti, U. Arena, R. G. Romanelli, L. Rega, M. Fos chi, S. Colagrande, A. Petrarca, S. 
Moscarella, G. Belli, A. L. Zignego, F. Marra, G. Laffi, and M. Pinzani, “Liver stiffness measurement 
predicts severe portal hypertension in patients with HCV -related cirrhosis,” Hepatology , vol. 45, no. 
5, pp. 1290 –1297 , 2007.  
[9] C. Bureau, S. Metivier, J. M. Peron, J. Selves, M. A. Robic, P. A. Gourraud, O. Rouquet, E. Dupuis, 
L. Alric, and J. P. Vinel, “Transient elastography accurately predicts presence of significant portal 
hypertension in patients with chronic live r disease,” Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. , vol. 27, no. 12, pp. 
1261 –1268, 2008.  
[10] M. A. Robic, B. Procopet, S. Métivier, J. M. Péron, J. Selves, J. P. Vinel, and C. Bureau, “Liver 
stiffness accurately predicts portal hypertension related complications in p atients with chronic liver 
disease: A prospective study,” J. Hepatol. , vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1017 –1024, 2011.  
[11] L. Castera, M. Pinzani, and J. Bosch, “Non invasive evaluation of portal hypertension using 
transient elastography,” J. Hepatol. , vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 696 –703, 2012.  
[12] G. Kim, M. Y. Kim, and S. K. Baik, “Transient elastography versus hepatic venous pressure gradient 
for diagnosing portal hypertension: a systematic review and meta -analysis,” Clin. Mol. Hepatol. , 
vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 34 –41, 2017.  
[13] S. Ipek -Ugay, H. Tzschätzsch, J. Braun, T. Fischer, and I. Sack, “Physiologic reduction of hepatic 
venous blood flow by the Valsalva maneuver decreases liver stiffness,” J. Ultrasound Med. , vol. 36, 
no. 7, pp. 1305 –1311, 2017.  
[14] É. Bavu, J. L. Genn isson, M. Couade, J. Bercoff, V. Mallet, M. Fink, A. Badel, A. Vallet -Pichard, B. 6 
Diffusion non restreinte  Nalpas, M. Tanter, and S. Pol, “Noninvasive In Vivo Liver Fibrosis Evaluation Using Supersonic 
Shear Imaging: A Clinical Study on 113 Hepatitis C Virus Patients,” Ultrasound Med. Biol. , vol. 37, 
no. 9, pp. 1361 –1373, 2011.  
[15] G. Ferraioli, R. Lissandrin, M. Zicchetti, and C. Filice, “Assessment of liver stiffness with transient 
elastography by using S and M probes in healthy children,” Eur. J. Pediatr. , vol. 171, no. 9, p. 1415, 
2012.  
[16] M. O’Donnell, “NMR blood flow imaging using multiecho, phase contrast sequences,” Med. Phys. , 
vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 59 –64, Jan. 1985.  
[17] S. Gelman, K. C. Fowler, and L. R. Smith, “Liver circulation and function during isoflurane and 
halothane anesthesia,” Anesthesiology , vol. 61, no. 6, p. 726 —730, 1984.  
[18] N. Kanaya, M. Nakayama, S. Fujita, and A. Namiki, “Comparison of the effects of sevoflurane, 
isoflurane and halothane on indocyanine green clearance,” Br. J. Anaesth. , vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 164 –
167, 1995.  
 