Title: Moderate stem cell telomere shortening rate postpones cancer onset in
  stochastic model
Abstract:   Mammalian cells are restricted from proliferating indefinitely. Telomeres at
the end of each chromosome are shortened at cell division and, when they reach
a critical length, the cell will enter permanent cell cycle arrest - a state
known as senescence. This mechanism is thought to be tumor suppressing, as it
helps prevent precancerous cells from dividing uncontrollably.
  Stem cells express the enzyme telomerase, which elongates the telomeres,
thereby postponing senescence. However, unlike germ cells and most types of
cancer cells, stem cells only express telomerase at levels insufficient to
fully maintain the length of their telomeres leading to a slow decline in
proliferation potential. It is not yet fully understood how this decline
influences the risk of cancer and the longevity of the organism. We here
develop a stochastic model to explore the role of telomere dynamics in relation
to both senescence and cancer. The model describes the accumulation of
cancerous mutations in a multicellular organism and creates a coherent
theoretical framework for interpreting the results of several recent
experiments on telomerase regulation. We demonstrate that the longest average
cancer free life span before cancer onset is obtained when stem cells start
with relatively long telomeres that are shortened at a steady rate at cell
division. Furthermore, the risk of cancer early in life can be reduced by
having a short initial telomere length. Finally, our model suggests that
evolution will favour a shorter than optimal average cancer free life span in
order to postpone cancer onset until late in life.

Full Text: Moderate stem cell telomere shortening rate postpones cancer onset in stochastic
model.
Simon Holbek, Kristian Moss Bendtsen, Jeppe Juul
University of Copenhagen, Niels Bohr Institute, Blegdamsvej 17, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark
(Dated: November 3, 2018)
Mammalian cells are restricted from proliferating indenitely. Telomeres at the end of each
chromosome are shortened at cell division and, when they reach a critical length, the cell will enter
permanent cell cycle arrest - a state known as senescence. This mechanism is thought to be tumor
suppressing, as it helps prevent precancerous cells from dividing uncontrollably.
Stem cells express the enzyme telomerase, which elongates the telomeres, thereby postponing
senescence. However, unlike germ cells and most types of cancer cells, stem cells only express
telomerase at levels insucient to fully maintain the length of their telomeres leading to a slow
decline in proliferation potential. It is not yet fully understood how this decline inuences the risk
of cancer and the longevity of the organism.
We here develop a stochastic model to explore the role of telomere dynamics in relation to both
senescence and cancer. The model describes the accumulation of cancerous mutations in a multicel-
lular organism and creates a coherent theoretical framework for interpreting the results of several
recent experiments on telomerase regulation.
We demonstrate that the longest average cancer free life span before cancer onset is obtained when
stem cells start with relatively long telomeres that are shortened at a steady rate at cell division.
Furthermore, the risk of cancer early in life can be reduced by having a short initial telomere length.
Finally, our model suggests that evolution will favour a shorter than optimal average cancer free
life span in order to postpone cancer onset until late in life.
PACS numbers: 87.10.Mn, 87.19.xj, 82.39.Rt
INTRODUCTION
Telomeres are the non-coding ends of chromosomes
that prevent loss of genomic information during chromo-
some replication [1]. Each cell division leads to a telom-
ere shortening of 50-100 base pairs, partly due to what is
known as the end-replication problem [2, 3]. When the
telomeres reach a critical length the cell goes senescent, a
state of permanent replication arrest that prohibits any
further proliferation [4]. The number of divisions a cell
can undergo before it reaches senescence is called the
Hayick limit [5].
Short telomeres have been linked to increased mor-
tality and age related diseases [6] and accumulation of
senescent cells is seen as one of the major causes of age-
ing [5, 7, 8]. However, the proliferation limit associated
with telomere attrition is thought to work as a fail-safe
mechanism against cells that divide in an uncontrolled
and rapid fashion, particularly cancer cells [9].
Genes that are critical in maintaining cells in a non-
cancerous state are called proto-oncogenes or tumor sup-
pressor genes. Estimates of the number of mutations in
these genes needed for a healthy cell to turn cancerous
range from 3-6 [10] and above [11].
Cancer cells replicate uncontrollably and have unlim-
ited proliferation capability, known as cellular immor-
tality [12]. Consequently, the cancerous cell must by-
pass the end-replication problem, which in 90% of can-
cers is done by expressing the enzyme telomerase [13].
Telomerase, which mainly consists of the two componentsTERT and TERC, elongates the telomeres such that the
telomere length of cancer cells is maintained during repli-
cation [14]. Besides being present in cancer cells, telom-
erase is also found in stem cells and germ line cells [12].
The amount of telomerase in germ line cells is sucient
to maintain telomere length [1]. For stem cells, however,
the level of telomerase is so low that telomeres are still
shortened after each cell division, but at a lower rate than
for somatic cells [15].
It is an open question why stem cells express telom-
erase, and why the level of telomerase is not high enough
to avoid a shortening of the telomere length throughout
life.
It has been suggested that telomere shortening is
a trade-o between limiting oncogenesis and reducing
physiological ageing [16{18].
The capability of cells to tune their telomere shorten-
ing rate by varying the expression of telomerase suggests
the possibility of optimal telomere shortening strategies.
In this paper we present a stochasticl model that anal-
yses how shortening of stem cell telomeres are coupled to
the trade-o between ageing and postponing cancer. Pre-
vious mathematical models for telomere dynamics have
mostly focused on the cellular transition to a senescent
state [19, 20], and previous cancer models have focused
mostly on oncogenesis [21, 22]. This work tries to bridge
these areas of focus, developing a more coherent math-
ematical modelling framework for considering telomere
dynamics in relation to both senescence and cancer. We
nd that there exists a telomere shortening rate that op-arXiv:1305.4264v1  [q-bio.CB]  18 May 20132
timizes the cancer free life span of the organism. Our
results also show that a suboptimal cancer free life span
strategy may be selected in order to reduce the risk of
cancer before the childbearing age.
THE MODEL
The stochatic model describes the accumulation of can-
cerous mutations in a multicellular organism, where each
cell division will result in a shortening of the telomere
sequence due to the end-replication-problem.
Mutations can arise during division of either somatic
cells or stem cells. Initially an unmutated stem cell di-
vides, thereby creating a somatic cell and a daughter
stem cell. The somatic cell then proliferates until it, af-
terH0divisions, reaches the Hayick limit and undergoes
senescence.
The Hayick limit can be interpreted as the conversion
of an initial telomere length, since a correlation between
the replicative capacity of a cell and its initial telomere
length has been shown [23].
During each division, the somatic cell has a probability
pof acquiring a cancerous mutation, which is then prop-
agated through the cell lineage in our model. In order
to maintain homeostasis, only one daughter cell survives
after each replication.
When the somatic cell has gone senescent it is removed
and all mutations accumulated in the somatic cell lineage
are lost.
The daughter stem cell then divides to produce a new
daughter stem cell and a new generation of somatic cells.
Each time a stem cell divides, the Hayick limit HG
is reduced by a constant amount  > 0, corresponding
to the daughter stem cell having shorter telomeres than
its parent. Additionally, there is a probability pscof a
cancerous mutation occurring in the self-renewing stem
cell. Such mutations are permanent and are inherited by
all stem cells in the stem cell lineage in the model.
If at any point the cell accumulates more than Cmmu-
tations, the organism is no longer cancer free. This will
inevitably happen as mutations are steadily accumulated
in the stem cell lineage, such that somatic cell lines start
with more and more mutations.
The total number of cell divisions that the system un-
dergoes before the onset of cancer is interpreted as the
cancer free life span of the organism. A schematic illus-
tration of the model is shown in Fig. 1.
THEORETICAL ANALYSIS
In this section we derive a mathematical expression for
the average cancer free life span obtained for dierent
telomere shortening strategies.
Divisions
Stem cellgenerati onsHG−αH03mutations
2mutations
1mutation
0mutations
Stem CellFigure 1: Schematic illustration of the model. The ow of
time follows the dashed arrows. Initially, a stem cell divides.
One daughter cell specializes into a somatic cell, which pro-
liferates until it reaches the Hayick limit and goes senescent
(rst vertical row). The daughter stem cell then divides to
produce a new daughter stem cell and a new generation of
somatic cells (subsequent vertical rows). For each genera-
tion the Hayick limit HGis reduced by a constant amount
. At every cell division, somatic cells and stem cells have
the probabilities pandpsc, respectively, to acquire cancer-
ous mutations. Mutations in stem cells are permanent, while
mutations in somatic cell lineages are lost when the cell line
reaches the Hayick limit. When the system has accumulated
more thanCmmutations (which in this illustration is 2), the
organism will have developed cancer. The total cancer free
life span is thus the sum of all somatic divisions.
Each time a stem cell is introduced to the tissue, the
Hayick limit is reduced from its initial value H0due to
the telomere shortening of the stem cell. After Ggener-
ations the Hayick limit HGis given by
HG=bH0 Ge (1)
wherebedenotes rounding to the nearest integer. Dur-
ing each of the subsequent HGcell divisions, the cells
have a probability pof acquiring a cancerous mutation.
The probability F(x) that the cell line acquires xor fewer
mutations before it reaches the Hayick limit is given by
the Binomial cumulative distribution function
F(x) =xX
i=0HG
i
pi(1 p)HG i: (2)
At each stem cell division there is a risk pscof acquir-
ing a permanent mutation in the stem cell lineage. The
probability for the organism to have jmutations in the
stem cells after Ggenerations, but still be cancer free, is
denotedSG;j. This is given by the recurrence relation
SG+1;j= 
SG;j(1 psc) +SG;j 1psc
F(Cm j);(3)
where the expression in the bracket is the probability
of havingjmutations in the stem cell, and F(Cm j)3
is the probability of not exceeding the critical number
ofCmmutations during the somatic divisions, thereby
developing cancer.
The initial stem cell is unmutated, S0;0= 1, so in terms
of Kroeniker-delta the starting condition is
S0;j=0j (4)
Using Eq. (3) and Eq. (4), the system can be solved
numerically. Notice that when >0, the Hayick limit
will eventually drop to zero, after which the stem cell
undergoes senescence even if the cell line is still cancer
free. According to Eq. (1) this will happen afterH0 0:5

generations, which therefore gives an upper bound for
the total cancer free life span of the organism.
The overall probability that the organism will not have
developed cancer at a given generation is dened as.
SG=(P
jSG;j forGH0 0:5

0 for G>H0 0:5
(5)
The average cancer free life span hL(H0;)iis the
mean number of cell divisions the organism will live be-
fore exceeding the critical number of mutations. It can
be found by multiplying the probability of getting cancer
at each generation ( SG SG+1) by the number of cancer
free generations and the average Hayick limit each of
these consisted of.
hL(H0;)i=1X
G=1(SG SG+1)GH0+HG
2(6)
When= 0 the Hayick limit H0is constant and Eq.
(6) becomes
hL(H0;0)i=H01X
G=1SG (7)
Note that for this case SGwill never reach 0 and a cut
o is necessary. This is made when SG<10 5and has
negligible inuence on the cancer free life span.
RESULTS
We now x the ratio between the mutation probabili-
ties such thatp
psc= 100 according to [24, 25], and set p
= 10 2andCm= 6.
These choices of parameter values are not essential for
the conclusions and other choices yield qualitatively sim-
ilar results (see supplementary material).
The average cancer free life span is calculated from
Eq. (6) and Eq. (7) and their performance compared to
50
 55
 60
 65
 70
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1x 10-3
H
0α3
12
Percent deviation from the mean 
cancer free life span of strategy 1
-20-10012Shorter Initial
telomeres
Telomerase
Knockout
Telomerase upregulationFast Ageing
Slow AgeingFigure 2: Deviation in average cancer free life span for dif-
ferent initial Hayick limits and shortening factors com-
pared to the longest possible cancer free life span for constant
Hayick limit (strategy 1). The overall longest cancer free
life span (strategy 2) is obtained for a higher initial Hayick
limit, which is then slowly reduced through telomere short-
ening in stem cells. Strategy 3 has the same initial Hayick
limit as strategy 1 and the same telomere shortening rate as
strategy 3. Black arrows show how dierent experimental
setups can change the position in parameter space through
modications of the initial Hayick limit of stem cells and
the telomere shortening rate. A low initial Hayick limit and
high telomere shortening rate cause premature ageing due to
increased accumulation of senescent cells. Parameters: Cm=
6,p= 10 2,psc= 10 4.
the strategy with no stem cell telomere shortening that
yields the longest cancer free life span, as obtained from
Eq. (7). The result is shown in Fig. 2, where three
strategies for further study are labeled in the following
way:
1. The strategy where stem cells express a telomerase
activity, such that the telomere length of stem cells
is constant over time ( = 0). The initial Hayick
limit is chosen such that the cancer free life span is
maximized.
2. The strategy that gives the longest cancer free life
span when allowing stem cell telomeres to shorten
at each division ( >0). Again, the initial Hayick
limit is chosen such that the cancer free life span is
maximized. This results in a larger initial Hayick
limit than for strategy 1.
3. The strategy that combines the initial Hayick
limit from strategy 1 and the stem cell telomere
shortening rate from strategy 2. Note that this
strategy yields similar cancer free life span as ob-
tained for strategy 1.4
The shorter the telomere length of stem cells is, the
more frequent is the need for self renewal in order to
maintain homeostasis in the tissue. Every self renewal is
accompanied with the risk of accumulating an additional
permanent mutation [25]. Therefore, a lower value for
H0increases the rate at which mutations occur in the
stem cells.
Furthermore, a shorter H0will reduce the amount of
cell divisions before stem cell senescence, resulting in
faster ageing and a shorter maximum cancer free life
span.
KeepingH0xed and down-regulating the telomerase
production is equivalent to increasing , thus moving up-
wards in Fig. 2. The higher will suppress the risk of
developing cancer, as the risk can be managed by un-
dergoing fewer divisions before senescence. The higher
turnover rate results in systems where cancer is rarely
developed, but where the cancer free life span of other-
wise healthy cell lineages is limited by stem cells going
senescent.
Up-regulation of telomerase in stem cells results in a
lowerwhile up-regulation of telomerase in somatic cells
will increase the proliferation potential, which is equiv-
alent to a higher H0. These two eects combined can,
therefore, in Fig. 2 be illustrated as a shift downwards
to the right.
This shift of strategy can in small quantities be ad-
vantageous and prolong life, but is also associated with
an increased risk of developing cancer since somatic cells
are able to continue proliferating for longer before the
senescent fail-safe mechanism sets in.
These observation are supported by Fig. 3a and 3b,
which show the probability of the organism to still be
cancer free as a function of time, for each of the strategies
1, 2, and 3.
Surprisingly, we see that strategy 2, which yields the
longest cancer free life span, is also the one that is most
exposed to cancer early in life. This strategy benets
from less stem cells attrition late in life, thereby supply-
ing the system with less mutated cells, which in the end
increases the average time before cancer development.
Minimizing the risk of developing cancer at an early age
can be done by lowering H0, raising, or both. With
strategy 3 a higher percentage of a population would
therefore still be a cancer free in the early in life com-
pared to other strategies as 1 and 2 that have similar or
longer cancer free life span.
These results indicate that evolution would favour
species with a restricted telomerase production in their
stem cells above species that maintain their stem cells
telomere length fully throughout life. This shortening
rate can then be adjusted such that a lower cancer risk is
obtained at the childbearing age, thereby increasing the
chance of giving birth.
Therefore, strategies that solely optimize cancer free
life span may not be advantageous from an evolutionary
0 0.5 1 1.5 200.20.40.60.81
Probability to be cancer free
strategy 1 
strategy 2
strategy 3
0 0.5 1 1.5 2−0.0200.020.04
Fraction of mean cancer free life span of strategy 1Probability to be cancer free 
compared to strategy 1 strategy 2 − strategy 1 
strategy 3 − strategy 1 A)
B)Fraction of mean cancer free life span of strategy 1Figure 3: Probability of not yet having developed cancer as a
function of time for dierent telomere shortening strategies.
A:For all three strategies, the probability slowly decreases
with time. Only very few individuals will develop cancer later
than twice the mean cancer free life span of the population.
B:Probability of not yet having developed cancer for strategy
2 and 3 compared to strategy 1. Strategy 2, which has the
longest average cancer free life span, will have a higher prob-
ability of cancer development early in life. Strategy 3, which
has a low initial Hayick limit, is able to postpone cancer
until later in life.
point of view, if they increase the risk of cancer early in
life when reproduction takes place, as seen with strat-
egy 2. We also nd that cancer free life span for some
strategies, e.g. Strategy 3, can be prolonged even further
if telomerase is up-regulated at a later stage in life (see
supplementary materials).
Strategy 3 and other stem cell shortening strategies are
not without downsides, as the somatic cells will undergo
senescence after fewer and fewer divisions. Shorter telom-
eres and an accumulation of senescent cells are closely re-
lated to biological ageing [26, 27], hence, strategies that
suppresses cancer early in life by shortening their telom-
eres are associated with accelerated aging.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In our model a decrease of telomerase activity (TERT
or TERC) leads to a faster shortening of stem cell telom-5
eres per cell division. Our model predicts that any reduc-
tion of telomerase activity decreases the risk of cancers
early in life, but at the same time causes a higher rate
of stem cell replications. The increased replication rate
leads to an increased rate of cancerous mutations in the
stem cells. For certain regimes the advantages of telom-
erase activity down regulation resulting in a low risk of
cancer early in life is outweighed by the higher risk of
cancer later in life, and therefore the total cancer free
life span of the organism is reduced. The increased can-
cer risk when telomerase is removed was observed in a
study by Gonzlez et al. (2000) , where they found a
slight increase in oncogenesis in highly proliferating tis-
sue for TERC decient mice[28]. In addition our model
also predicts that stem cells will go senescent faster, and
therefore cause faster ageing. This is also consistent with
experimental observations; in a TERC mouse study Liu
et al. (1998) found that a lack of telomerase caused the
mice to present premature ageing symptoms, especially
in highly proliferating tissue [29].
Our model demonstrates that telomerase up-
regulation, in general, leads to an organism more
prone to developing cancer, which was observed
experimentally by Gonzlez et al. (2002)[30].
Furthermore, the model predicts that a temporal in-
duction of telomerase could increase cancer free life span
(see Supplementary). If the organism starts with a mod-
erate telomerase activity and then increases the activity,
the organism could prevent cancer onset at an early stage
of life and postpone ageing, thereby increasing longevity.
A recent study by Bernandes de Jesus et al. (2012) sup-
ports this result. By inducing telomerase activity in adult
mice, they were able to increase longevity without in-
creasing the risk of cancer [31].
Additionally, it has been shown that, when comparing
two types of TERC decient mice with dierent genetic
backgrounds - one type with initially shorter telomeres
and one with normal initial telomere length - the mice
with shorter telomeres show decreased viability, not due
to cancer, but due to premature ageing [32, 33]. Our
model demonstrates that decreasing H0leads to a faster
attrition of the stem cell pool and therefore faster ageing.
In conclusion, our model oers an explanation to why
stem cells express telomerase at a moderate level, such
that their telomere lengths are not conserved but is short-
ened at a lower rate than in somatic cells. Furthermore,
our results suggest that, in stem cells, evolution will favor
short initial telomeres that are slowly shortened at each
division (strategy 3), as this strategy is able to reduce
the likelihood of cancer early in life.
[1] M. A. Blasco, Nat Rev Genet 6, 611 (2005).
[2] M. Lorenz, G. Saretzki, N. Sitte, S. Metzkow, and T. vonZglinicki, Free Radical Biology and Medicine 31, 824
(2001).
[3] K. E. Human, S. D. Levene, V. M. Tesmer, J. W. Shay,
and W. E. Wright, Journal of Biological Chemistry 275,
19719 (2000).
[4] J. Campisi and F. d'Adda di Fagagna, Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol8, 729 (2007).
[5] J. Campisi, Cell 120, 513 (2005).
[6] R. M. Cawthon, K. R. Smith, E. O'Brien, A. Sivatchenko,
and R. A. Kerber, Lancet 361, 393 (2003).
[7] M. Collado, M. A. Blasco, and M. Serrano, Cell (2007).
[8] K. M. Bendtsen, J. Juul, and A. Trusina, PloS one 7,
e36018 (2012).
[9] M. Collado and M. Serrano, Nature Reviews Cancer 10,
51 (2010).
[10] B. Alberts, Molecular Biology of the Cell , Reference Edi-
tion (Garland Pub, 2008).
[11] R. A. Beckman and L. A. Loeb, Seminars in cancer biol-
ogy (2005).
[12] E. Hiyama and K. Hiyama, British journal of cancer
(2007).
[13] J. W. Shay, R. R. Reddel, and W. E. Wright, Science
336, 1388 (2012).
[14] M. A. Blasco, Nature chemical biology (2007).
[15] Y.-S. Cong, W. E. Wright, and J. W. Shay, Microbiology
and molecular biology reviews 66, 407 (2002).
[16] J. Campisi, S.-h. Kim, C.-S. Lim, M. Rubio, et al., Ex-
perimental gerontology 36, 1619 (2001).
[17] J. Campisi, Mech. Ageing Dev. (2005).
[18] F. Rodier and J. Campisi, The Journal of Cell Biology
192, 547 (2011).
[19] R. D. Portugal, M. G. P. Land, and B. F. Svaiter, Biosys-
tems91, 262 (2008).
[20] J. op den Buijs, P. P. J. van den Bosch, M. W. J. M.
Musters, and N. A. W. van Riel, Mech. Ageing Dev. 125,
437 (2004).
[21] I. Tomlinson, P. Sasieni, and W. Bodmer, The american
journal of pathology 160, 755 (2002).
[22] R. A. Beckman and L. A. Loeb, PNAS 103, 14140 (2006).
[23] R. C. Allsopp, H. Vaziri, C. Patterson, S. Goldstein,
E. V. Younglai, A. B. Futcher, C. W. Greider, and C. B.
Harley, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
89, 10114 (1992).
[24] R. J. Albertini, J. A. Nicklas, J. P. O'Neill, and S. H.
Robison, Annual review of genetics 24, 305 (1990).
[25] R. B. Cervantes, J. R. Stringer, C. Shao, J. A. Tis-
cheld, and P. J. Stambrook, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 99, 3586 (2002).
[26] R. M. Cawthon, K. R. Smith, E. O'Brien, A. Sivatchenko,
and R. A. Kerber, The Lancet 361, 393 (2003).
[27] U. Herbig, M. Ferreira, L. Condel, D. Carey, and J. M.
Sedivy, Science 311, 1257 (2006).
[28] E. Gonz alez-Su arez, E. Samper, J. M. Flores, and M. A.
Blasco, Nat Genet 26, 114 (2000).
[29] H. W. Lee, M. A. Blasco, G. J. Gottlieb, J. W. Horner,
C. W. Greider, and R. A. DePinho, Nature 392, 569
(1998).
[30] E. Gonz alez-Su arez, J. M. Flores, and M. A. Blasco,
Molecular and cellular biology 22, 7291 (2002).
[31] B. Bernardes de Jesus, E. Vera, K. Schneeberger, A. M.
Tejera, E. Ayuso, F. Bosch, and M. A. Blasco, EMBO
Molecular Medicine 4, 691 (2012).
[32] K. L. Rudolph, S. Chang, H.-W. Lee, M. Blasco, G. J.
Gottlieb, C. Greider, and R. A. DePinho, Cell 96, 7016
(1999).
[33] E. Herrera, E. Samper, J. Mart n-Caballero, J. M. Flores,
H.-W. Lee, and M. A. Blasco, The EMBO Journal 18,2950 (1999).7
{ SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL {
In this supplementary note, we show that the choices of the parameter values Cm;pandpscare not essential for
the overall conclusions drawn in the article regarding cancer free life span obtained by shortening the Hayick limit
after each stem cell division.
We here present three cases where the value of one parameter is varied, compared to those used for generating
gure 2 in the article, while the two others kept constant. We show again, that some shortening strategies can both
prolong life and postpone cancer early in life, and that the benets of this depends on the choice of parameter values.
The black dot on the gures represents the strategy with a constant Hayick limit that produces the longest cancer
free life span. First we keep pandpscxed and change Cmto 4. See gure 4
25 30 35 400246x 10−4
H0α
-20-15-10-500.51
Percent deviation from the mean cancer free
 life span of strategy  indicated by 
Figure 4: Deviation in average cancer free life span for dierent initial Hayick limits and shortening factors compared to the
longest possible cancer free life span for constant Hayick limit (black dot). Decreasing Cmreduces the benet one can obtain
by shortening the stem cell telomeres in order to maximize the cancer free life span compared to the strategy with constant
Hayick limit. Parameters: Cm= 4,p= 10 2andpsc= 10 4.8
Second, the stem cell mutation rate pscis increased by a factor 10, with Cmandpkept xed. See gure 5
65 75 85 95 10500.0050.010.015
H0α
-30-20-10012
Percent deviation from the mean cancer free
 life span of strategy  indicated by 
Figure 5: Keeping Cmandpxed, but increasing pscby a factor 10, results in optimal strategies with higher H0andas
stem cells should be introduced less frequent due to their increased mutation probability. Parameters: Cm= 6,p= 10 2and
psc= 10 3.9
Lastly, the mutation rate for somatic cells pis increased by a factor 2, with Cmandpsckept unchanged. See gure
6
25 30 35 400246x 10−4
H0α
-40-30-20-100123
Percent deviation from the mean cancer free
 life span of strategy  indicated by 
Figure 6: Increasing the mutations rate for somatic cells will shift the optimal strategies towards lower H0andas stem cells
should now be introduced more frequently. Parameters: Cm= 6,p= 2 10 2andpsc= 10 4.10
In order to verify that life can be prolonged by adding telomerase later in life, we here present one example of how
this could occur. In this example we compare strategy 3 with strategy 3*. Strategy 3* has the same initial conditions
as strategy 3, but will, when reaching HG= 39, double its telomerase production (halving ) for the remaining cancer
free life span. With this up-regulation in telomerase production the longevity can be increased. The increased cancer
free life span relies solely on the ability to postpone stem cell senescence by stimulating it with telomerase. The steep
peak in Fig. (7), which is seen after a time 2.1 longer than the mean cancer free life span, is caused by the stem cells
of strategy 3 going senescent so SGimmediately drops to 0.
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 300.020.04
Strategy 3* −Strategy 3Telom erase up reg ulatio nProbability to be cancer free 
compared to strategy 3
Fraction of mean cancer free life span of strategy 3
Figure 7: Increased probability to be cancer free for two strategies with same initial conditions but with strategy 3* having an
up-regulation of telomerase later in life. The up-regulation (lower ) leads to slightly increased cancer risk, but the strategy
turns advantageous later on, as the increased telomerase production postpones the time at which the stem cells go senescent.
The stem cells of strategy 3 go senescent shortly after a time 2.1 longer than the mean cancer free life span, whereas this is
postponed for strategy 3*.