Title: NeuroBoun: An inquiry-based approach for exploring scientific literature
  -- a use case in neuroscience
Abstract:   Online scientific publications provide vast opportunities for researchers.
Alas, the quantity and the rate of increase in the articles make the
utilization of these resources very challenging. This work presents as
inquiry-based approach to support the articulation of complex inter-related
queries to gain insights regarding how these subjects have been studied in
conjunction with one another as reported in the scientific literature. For this
purpose we introduce inquiries that represent inter-related subqueries that are
of interest to a researcher. The inquiries are expanded to better capture the
intent of the inquirer, from which several queries are generated that represent
various juxtapositions of the subjects in consideration. The sets of queries
are used to search repositories to yield results that reveal quantitative and
temporal relations among the subjects of the inquiry. A web-based tool,
NeuroBoun, is developed as a proof of concept for medical publications found in
PubMed. A use case related to the asymmetry of amygdala is presented to
illustrate the potentials of the proposed approach.

Full Text: NeuroBoun: An inquiry-based approach for
exploring scientic literature {
a use case in neuroscience
Uskudarli, S∗:, G okdeniz, E., and Canbeyli, R.;
:Department of Computer Engineering, Bogazici University,
Turkey
Sony Global Solutions, Turkey
;Department of Psychology, Bogazici University, Turkey
Abstract
Online scientic publications provide vast opportunities for researchers.
Alas, the quantity and the rate of increase in the articles make the uti-
lization of these resources very challenging. This work presents as inquiry-
based approach to support the articulation of complex inter-related queries
to gain insights regarding how these subjects have been studied in con-
junction with one another as reported in the scientic literature. For this
purpose we introduce inquiries that represent inter-related subqueries that
are of interest to a researcher. The inquiries are expanded to better cap-
ture the intent of the inquirer, from which several queries are generated
that represent various juxtapositions of the subjects in consideration. The
sets of queries are used to search repositories to yield results that reveal
quantitative and temporal relations among the subjects of the inquiry. A
web-based tool, NeuroBoun , is developed as a proof of concept for medi-
cal publications found in PubMed. A use case related to the asymmetry
of amygdala is presented to illustrate the potentials of the proposed ap-
proach.
1 Introduction
Gaining insight into the nature and results of a scientic investigation
is quite complex. Additionally, the accelerating rate of scientic pub-
lications make it exceedingly dicult to follow scientic developments.
To grasp the developments related to a particular subject, an inquirer
needs to be able to glean the relevant aspects and results that have been
contributed by numerous scientists over a period of time. For example,
∗Corresponding author, suzan.uskudarli@boun.edu.tr
1arXiv:2001.00186v1  [cs.IR]  1 Jan 2020complex and comprehensive search (inquiries) consider the case of amyg-
dalar asymmetry in the presence of themes that are often of interest, such
as mood (i.e. anxiety, depression, etc.), brain functions (learning, mem-
ory, etc) and evaluative aspects (salience, valence, etc). The process of
inquiry requires support for accessing information at various resolutions.
To this end, one may need to rst explore various concepts related to the
inquiry (high level) and then delve deeper into details (low level). More-
over, the inquiry process must be responsive so as to support the ow of
the inquiry, since the responses will likely guide further inquiries.
This work originates from a real-world use case in the neuroscience
domain where we investigate the lateralization of brain regions as to how
extensively they have been so far studied. We had been systematically
querying PubMed to understand how certain concepts in neuroscience are
inter-related and to what degree they have been investigated by examining
publications. This process was laborious, time consuming and potentially
error prone since such exploration is performed via aggregating the re-
sults of numerous manual queries. Upon reection, it was evident that a
tool that supports the articulation of interrelated queries that would au-
tomatically query PubMed could relieve all three concerns and expedite
the topical search without disrupting the ow of the researchers atten-
tion. The design of NeuroBoun emerged while investigating the cerebral
asymmetry in general and the lateralization of subcortical structures such
as the amygdala in particular.
To address such needs we introduce the notion of an inquiry to express
a set of inter-related queries with a specic context that is of interest to
a researcher. Inquiries are made within a collection of documents that
represent a body of work (documented knowledge) and may be domain
dependent (i.e. medical publications) or independent (i.e. news articles).
The objective of an inquiry is to provide insight regarding the research per-
formed on inter-related subjects over time, which requires posing several
advanced searches. Essentially, inquiries consist of a main query which
serves as the central focus of interest (i.e., the brain region amygdala ) and
an optional set of relevant queries (i.e., the imaging technology fMRI and
the mood disorders depression and anxiety ). The inquires are processed
to better capture the intention to yield a set of queries, the results are
which are aggregated to present an explorable overview to the inquirer.
For this purpose, we created a tool called NeuroBoun tailored to ad-
dress the need to run inquiries for researchers to perform several compar-
isons without losing the context of their search. A prototype is imple-
mented to demonstrate this approach using PubMed [2] as the source of
documents, which consists of over 29 million articles related to biomedical
literature as of July 2019. This tool was not designed as an alternative
to PubMed, but rather to enhance and expedite the searching of topics
within the body of work it contains.
The need for complex and comprehensive search (inquiries) is illus-
trated using NeuroBoun with a use case concerning amygdalar asymme-
tryin conjunction with relevant themes of mood (anxiety, depression),
brain functions (learning, memory, etc) and evaluative aspects (salience,
valence, etc).
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 intro-
2duces related work, Section 3 presents our approach, Section 4 outlines
the implementation details, Section 5 elaborates our use case, Section 6
presents our observations related to this work and the future directions
we intend to pursue, and nally Section 7 makes concluding remarks.
2 Related Work
There is great motivation to improve access to research results, which
has led to work on various aspects of this vast challenge. This section
describes some of this work in terms of their domain of subjects, the
methods for performing searches, and the presentation of the results.
Systems that support access to research publications may be specic to
or independent of a domain. Google Scholar [12] is a widely used domain-
independent service that supports querying scholarly work (journal and
conference papers, theses and dissertations, academic books, pre-prints,
abstracts, technical reports) and patents. It returns a ranked list of arti-
cles with the number of citations they received and related work. Seman-
tic Scholar [1] is also a domain-independent service that utilizes articial
intelligence (AI) an provides functionality similar to Google Scholar. It
provides intent-based searching that uses features like locations, variation
of words, synonyms and concept matching to yield relevant peer reviewed
articles. Google Scholar has higher recall and lower precision in com-
parison to Semantic Scholar due to its coverage and search methodology.
Users elect to use the one based on the scope and depth of their intended
search. Sometimes Semantic Scholar is used to leap frog to Google Scholar
to fetch additional articles.
Among the most actively utilized scientic documents are those from
the biomedical domain due to the immense advances that have taken
place in this eld coupled with the desire to make timely use of these
developments in life impacting medical research. PubMed([2]) provides a
continuously evolving platform for exploring scholarly documents related
to biomedicine and health (presently over 30 million articles) with sophis-
ticated search functionality. To capture the intended search, the query is
enriched with alternative terms obtained from translation tables such as
MeSH (Medical Subject Headings) and other indexes such as for authors.
PubMed also provides application programming interfaces (APIs) called
theEntrez Programming Utilities API [21] for the developers interested
in utilizing PubMed data and querying the National Center for Biotech-
nology Information (NCBI) databases. Wrapper applications using the
Entrez API [8, 19] aim to improve the queries, the relevancy of search
results, or the user experience.
Several alternatives to using PubMed for searching medline [15, 17]
were found to improve the comprehensibility of the results by novice or
expert users via the providing lters and visualizations. Most of them
return lists of ranked articles with various attributes. A few return tables
or graphs that relate predetermined features such as domain specic con-
cepts (proteins or genes), authors, MeSH terms, or locations. Our work
diers from these approaches as our focus aims to support user dened
searches with inter-related dimensions and to respond with an overview
3that depicts how these dimensions are related. If desires, the researcher
can continue to diving in to specic aspects of result to eventually retrieve
articles.
Most of the recent work, including new and improved services, focus
on smart search technologies tailored to individual researchers. Articial
intelligence (AI) techniques are employed to deliver precise, comprehen-
sive and useful output. As the main source documents in the biomed-
ical domain, PubMed [7] is continuously being improved in preparation
for its next generation model. PubMed Labs [6] is the test site for the
new/improved functionalities such as ranking algorithms and optimized
user-interface experience. Meta [18] is developing a service to assist re-
searches with customized feeds that deliver real-time developments (publi-
cations, researchers, and related concepts) in biomedical research, thereby
reducing the laborious tasks of tracking research. Similarly, Scopus Dis-
covery [5] is developing a model to provide personalized content discovery
that is rened through learning researchers' behavior based on their pre-
vious activities.
All these platforms focus on one of the most important aspects of sci-
entic literature search, namely identifying the intent of a researcher by
examining their behaviour patterns. Understanding the intended query
is crucial to delivering desired results. Prior to the recent AI-based im-
provements log analysis [4, 14] or session based approaches [16, 22] were
employed to understand searching behavior patterns. Such behaviour was
found to dier based on the domain of research, such as in oncology [23]
and pandemic diseases [20]. .
Some studies focus on extracting relations and connectivity informa-
tion for specic domains to automate the retrieval of precise and compre-
hensive information relevant to a query performed against an extensive
body of scientic information. WhiteText [9] extracts neuroanatomical
connectivity relations from publications retrieved from PubMed [10] using
NLP techniques. It presents the connected regions and species as a result.
To preserve the context, the Named Entities (proteins, genes, and brain
regions) are extracted from the documents on a sentence basis. A similar
approach extracts neuroanatomical relations by specifying patterns over
the constituency and dependency parse trees of sentences [11].
NeuroBoun is a wrapper application that uses PubMed as a data
source that aims to enhance the existing capabilities of PubMed and expe-
dite inquiries which are complex search operations related to inter-related
subjects. The main dierence of our approach is the generation of a set
of subqueries from inquiries and the aggregation of the result to provide
an overview of how the subqueries are inter-related. The overview can be
further explored to see the details and eventually reach the articles that
contribute to the results. This overview may be used to focus on par-
ticular sub-sets or to revise the inquiry to alter the results. NeuroBoun
provides a comprehensive and contextual user journey for the researchers
as is detailed with a use case in Section 5. The ultimate goal is to pro-
vide researchers with a tool that enables them to concentrate on their
investigation without having to switch contexts.
4userCross
Queries
Expand
QueriesSearch
Queries q2:td21; : : :uq1:td11; : : :uResult set:
@dPd
...
Synonyms
Acronyms
Document
RepositoryProcess
DocumentsDocumentscq
qs
sq d
r dConstruct QueriesSearch
@qPeq
ii:mq
i:rq
i:syneq
Figure 1: An overview of processing inquires. Here iis an inquiry posed by a
user, cqis a set of queries composed by juxtaposing the related queries with the
main query, and eqis the corresponding set of queries expanded with synonyms.
3 Approach
We introduce the notion of an inquiry to express a set of inter-related
queries with a specic context that is of interest to a researcher. Inquiries
are made within a collection of documents that represent a body of work
(documented knowledge) and may be domain dependent (i.e. medical
publications) or independent (i.e. news articles). Essentially, inquires
have a main query which serves as the central focus of interest, such
as the brain region amygdala . Additionally, other queries of interest in
conjunction with the main query may be specied. For example, queries
related to the amygdala may include the imaging technology fMRI and
the mood disorders depression and anxiety . These queries could be of
interest when studying the relevance of imaging technologies and mood
disorders in research related to amygdala.
The objective of an inquiry is to provide insight regarding how various
queries are related to one another over time. This involves examining the
queries in conjunction with one another. Since the main query establishes
the context of the inquiry, it is present in all query result. The remaining
queries are performed in all possible combination with each other. Figure 3
shows the queries related the inquiry xmq,trq1; rq2; rq1u, c, s, tiy, where
mqandrqirepresents the main query and related queries respectively.
Related queries may include sub-queries, each of which is searched
independently. For example, the inquiry xmq,ta1; a2u,D,Syn, tiy, if
rq1rq11; rq12andrq2rq21the set of queries to be performed is:
tmq; mq^rq11; mq^rq12; mq^rq21u. Here, the sub-queries are not
examined in conjunction with one another ( q11^q12), but rather the
5Type Denition Description
I MQ;RQ;DC;SY;TI¡inquiry
MQ QT main query
QT W + term
RQtQT ","u related query
W w-regex word
S s-regex sentence
TI  Y;Y¡ time period (interval)
Y y-regex year.
R D   document resource
D T;S+;Y;ID¡ document
DC tD ","u+ document collection
T String title
SYN SI  set of synonyms items
SI W;rW s¡ synonyms & acronyms
Table 1: The type symbols used for making inquiries.
pmq^rq1^rq2^rq3q
pmq^rq1^rq3q pmq^rq1^rq2q pmq^rq2^rq3q
pmq^rq2q pmq^rq1q pmq^rq3q
pmqq
Figure 2: The queries of an inquiry with three aspects ( rq1; rq2; s3) and the
main query mq.
6dimensions are examined in conjunction with one another. The rationale
here is that related queries capture an aspect of interest within the context
of inquiry. Thus, the aspects that are of interest with respect to each other
are dened as separate dimensions rather than sub-queries.
The remainder of this section formally denes inquires by introducing
a set of types and functions. Table 1 shows the types relevant to inquiries.
All type names are denoted with capital letters. Curly braces denote sets
and angle brackets denote tuples. The regular expression symbols \ *" and
\+" are used to denote sets of zero or more orone or more repetitions.
3.1 Inquiries
The main type I(inquiry) consists of a main query ( MQ), an optional
set of related queries ( RQ), a document resource ( R), a set of synonyms
(SYN), and a time interval ( TI). The default time interval corresponds to
the dates of the oldest and the more recent documents. The document
resource is a set of URIs (Uniform Resource Identier) from which infor-
mation about publications are obtained. Such information is the title,
abstract, keywords, publication date, and the body of an article. This pa-
per describes inquires over the most widely accessible information about
articles, namely their titles and abstracts.
Here, words, sentences and years are specied with regular expressions
(s-regex, w-regex , and y-regex). A sentence consists of a sequence of
characters that terminate with a ',', '!', or '?'1The regular expressions
for words and years are dened as \W\\w+\W and d{4}.
A time interval is denoted as  yi; yj¡where yi:Y,yj:Y,yi¤yj. A
document d:Dconsists of a title, a set of sentences extracted from the
abstract of the publication, a publication date, and an identier provided
by the document resource. In the examples provided in this paper, the
resource is PubMed and the identiers are called PMID2.
The semantics of performing an inquiry is dened with a set func-
tions. Variables are denoted with lowercase letters that are declared as
variableName :variableType (i.e. inq:I). Variables representing a set are
denoted with the subscript \s" (i.e. qs:QT+for a set of query terms).
Accessor functions for composite data are presumed to exist and denoted
using the dot notation with the name of the component. For example,
i:mq returns the main query of i(i:I).
In the following functions, let
inquirepiqxmq;rqs;ds;syns; tiy
where i:I,mq:Q,rqs:Q+,syns:SY, and ti:TI,syns:SYis a domains-
specic set of synonyms and acronyms.
The main function inquire is dened as:
inquirepiqsearchpqueriespiq;documentspi:dc; i:tiqq
1The prototype relies on the well known Natural Language Toolkit ( https://www.nltk.
org/) for sentences.
2In our use case the resources are obtained from the Entrez API for PubMed: https:
//eutils.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/eutils/
7whose result set whose elements are the sets of documents that match a
query of the inquiry. For example, the inquiry:
inquire(x"amygdala ",t"depression, anxiety ","fMRI "u,SSns,PM,h1980;2018iy)
"amygdala "(the main query) is examined along with the related queries:
"depression, anxiety "and "fMRI ". A set of synonyms ( SSns) is used to
expand the query terms. Also, the inquiry is limited to the documents
published between 1980 to 2018 in accordance with:
documentspds;hb; eiqtd|dPds; b¤d:y¤eu (1)
The query terms are expanded as:
expandpqt; syq|qt|¹
i1synsetpwi; syq (2)
where wiis the ithword in qtand synsetpw; sqis the set of synonyms and
acronyms for wins.
The queries corresponding to an inquiry iare obtained by taking the
cross product of the main query with the power set of the related queries
(both expanded):
queriespiqexpandpi:mqq¡
Ppexpandpi:rq; i:synqq (3)
where queries piqforms the set of all queries that will be performed. We
refer to an element of this set as a cross-query . The search function for a
query term is:
searchpqs; dsqtd|dPds; qPqs; matchpq; dqtrueu (4)
matchpq; d;wqs-matchpq; d:tit; wq_s-matchpq; si;wq(5)
where , siPd.sentences and s-match is a function that returns true if a
query term is contained in a string and false otherwise. For query terms
of single words, this is equivalent to the word being an element of the
set of words within the document. For multi-word terms, the words must
occur in the document in the same order as in the query. Optionally,
a document including text that matches a the query terms with possible
intermediate words may be considered a hit. This is useful when the query
terms need not occur consecutively in the document, such as in the case
of \left amygdala" which should match \left and right amygdala" or \left
basolateral amygdala" since they refer to left amygdala. All punctuation
marks within the document are ignored.
Articles are represented as:  t; a; s s¡where t:T,a:Text, and ssS.
The query expansion is performed as follows:
•Query Component Processing: The query terms are searched in the
title and the abstract of an article. The query terms are converted to
regular expressions and expanded with the acronyms and synonyms.
8•Acronym and Synonym Expansion: To capture the intention of the
query, domain specic acronyms and synonyms are used to expand
the query terms. For example, left amygdala is expanded to \ left
(amygdala|amygdalar|amygdalae )".
•Window of matching terms: Queries containing multiple terms match
sentences with up to six words between the query words. The regular
expressions are constructed to accept six intermediate words (a num-
ber that was determined through experimentation). For example,
the query term left amygdala becomes \ left (( nw)* ) f0,6gamygdala'' .
•Word Boundary Restrictions: Regular expressions impose word bound-
aries on query terms so that a query term like \ man" only matches
\man" and not words that include it as a substring (performance,
manner, manipulation, and woman). The query term \ man" is trans-
formed to the regular expression \ nW(man)nW".
Each query term is transformed into a regular expression such that the
resultant set consists of all the matching documents. The results of an
inquiry are presented as a table that displays the frequencies of the docu-
ments for each cross-query. This enables viewing the relative frequencies
of the combinations of the queries within an inquiry in a juxtaposed man-
ner. The frequency of articles according the their year of publication are
shown as a histogram. For a specic year, matching articles are shown
with their pmid ,doi, publication year, article title, and the sentences in
the article that match the query. The user may view a specic article on
PubMed by clicking on the pmid .
4 Implementation Details
A prototype, NeuroBoun, of the proposed method is implemented as
a web application using Python3Documents were retrieved from PubMed
via Entrez API4. A subset of the articles were fetched that contain the
term \amygdala" (totaling 38,998 as of 12.10.2019). The documents are
represented with their PMID (document identiers provided by PubMed),
their titles and their abstracts which are stored as a list of sentences.
Sentences are the main units of documents that are used to seek ele-
ments of interest. The NLTK library [3] is used to parse the abstracts to
yield sentences. PostgreSQL [13] was used to store the processed docu-
ments. A demo of the system is accessible at soslab.cmpe.boun.edu.tr/
neuroboun .
5 Use case
The use of NeuroBoun tool will be described with a use case. A user
can search a subject along with several dimensions. The cross-queries
3can be accessed at http://soslab.cmpe.boun.edu.tr/neuroboun and the software is available
on a git repository. The data is available via PubMed.
4The Entrez API is available at: https://eutils.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/eutils/ . For
ease of replicability, we provide a script to fetch the documents that may be found at the code
repository.
9(as described in Section 3) are searched within the articles and the fre-
quencies and percentages that match the articles are returned. As such,
the researcher is presented the body of relevant publications for a quick
perusal or to perform detailed analysis such as to inspect the results of
specic cross-queries, specic documents, or sentences.
To start with, NeuroBoun oers several features to specify inquires as
shown in Figure 3. The following describes the user interface elements
that may be used to specify an inquiry:
Preceding/succeeding word: The main query may specify other terms
that may precede or succeed the central term. When preceding or suc-
ceeding words are specied a match within the document succeeds when
the terms are in the same sentence and occur within a distance of zero
to six words. In case of our example two preceding terms are specied
(\left" and \right"). The results will be presented separately for the
documents that include \amygdala" and those that precede \amygdala"
with the terms \left" and for \right" within 0-6 words. For example, a
document that has a sentence including \left basolateral amygdala" will
be considered a match. In this manner the user will be able to observe
the degree to which studies consider the left and right of amygdala in
research.
Dimension: Users can specify additional dimensions of interest by spec-
ifying corresponding search terms. Each dimension consists of one or
more search terms and each term consist of one or more words. These
dimensions are searched within the articles to inspect the degree to which
they co-occur in the same context. The user is presented an overview
table that summarizes the results of the cross-queries formed based on
the dimensions. The results can be further inspected by selecting a de-
sired cell within the summary table. In our use case the dimensions were
related to the brain regions (amygdala), moods (anxiety), and imaging
technologies (fMRI).
Time period: The user may limit the articles according the the pub-
lication date (year) by specifying a year for before and/or after some
given year. For example, the user may select "After" 1990 to explore the
impact of the emergence of fMRI technology in research facilities.
Field selection: An inquiry can be performed by searching for the terms
within the title and/or the abstract of the articles. This is specied by
selecting the desired option next to Gobutton (default is \All Fields").
In our case, we wanted to identify the articles related to amygdala to
delineate the functional, neuroanatomical and neurophysiological dier-
ences between the left and the right amygdala in the mammalian brain.
Additionally, we are interested in how development of new research tools
including neuroimaging changed the depth and scope of research on amyg-
dalar lateralization and whether there has been adequate explanation of
the mechanism underlying the lateralization commensurate with the in-
creasing rate of publications on this specic topic. Figure 3 shows this
inquiry ( lateralization of amygdala in the context of the moods of anxiety
and fear ) using NeuroBoun where the main query is set to \amygdala"
with the preceding words \left" and \right". Two dimensions are specied,
10Figure 3: An inquiry for inspecting the lateralization of amygdala with two
dimensions.
one for moods (\anxiety", \fear") and another for an imaging technology
(\fMRI"). No time limitation is specied.
Figure 4 shows various screens resulting from this inquiry. The screen
on the top left, presents the frequency/percentages of each cross-query in
a juxtaposed manner to reveal the degree to which they co-occur. While
examining the results, researchers can dive into the details of a specic
cross-section by clicking in a cell (i.e. right amygdala and anxiety) which
shows a trend graph of the number of articles published on a yearly basis
is shown along with the total number of matching articles and sentences.
The user can further proceed by examining the documents that match the
queries. For each document the doi,pmid , title, and a link to PubMed
article is shown. More signicantly, the relevant sentences may be seen
which highlight the matching terms in the title and abstract of the arti-
cles. In this example, the query "right amygdala" matches with an article
containing a sentence which has three words between "right" and "amyg-
dala", namely "right or the left amygdala" (see bottom right screen in
Figure 4. Finally, one may continue their exploration by accessing spe-
cic articles in PubMed by clicking on the id of an article.
6 Discussion and Future Work
The main aim of this work is to provide researchers with a tool to in-
vestigate a subject of interest within a body of work through inquiries that
embody a set of queries. For this purpose we developed a model for per-
forming and aggregating inter-related queries. A prototype of this model
was implemented that presents the results in a juxtaposition manner to
facilitate the comparison of the relative density of work regarding the as-
pects of the inquiry. It also, supports delving into any of the sub-contexts
11Figure 4: Search Results for main query of \amygdala" in comparison with
\left" and \right" amygdala which is combined with dimensions of moods like
anxiety, fear and fMRI
to view the work over years and the specic articles that highlight the
matching terms.
The current version of the system performs queries over the titles,
abstracts, and keywords of articles from PubMed. In recent years, there
is a signicant increase in open access articles which provides the full text
of documents. This exciting development presents many opportunities to
improve our results. Per feedback from researchers (who used our tool),
we think that the locations where the query terms match the document
(i.e,Future Work andResults ) may provide critical clues for researchers
regarding the signicance of the papers or their ndings. Another issue
of relevance is the assessment of the qualitative contribution of an article,
such as the introduction of a new method or an explanation.
We plan to improve inquiries with the use of more advanced NLP
methods and semantic web techniques to benet from the standardized
terms and the representation of domain knowledge to capture relationships
within documents and to perform semantic processing.
While the implementation of NeuroBoun tool supports inquiry in the
neuroscience domain, the design of the system is domain-independent with
its own document model. Thus, it can be adapted for alternative domains
of interest.
Finally, we intend to publish a paper dedicated to a critical assessment
of amygdalar asymmetry that uses the facilities provided by NeuroBoun .
127 Conclusion
We have proposed an approach for inquiry over a published body
of work and implemented a prototype that embodies its infrastructure.
The benecial insights provided by this inquiry-based approach is demon-
strated with the the prototype we developed that uses PubMed. Although
several approaches that utilize PubMed results for alternative presenta-
tion exist, ours provides a unied view of several enhanced queries.
NeuroBoun was developed based on our need to achieve a comprehen-
sive, ecient and expandable search for the case that we briey present
here, namely amygdalar lateralization. Although, its development origi-
nated from a specic context, it is designed to serve any body of knowl-
edge. We are encouraged by the results which for the foundation of work
we intend to pursue in several directions, among the most signicant are
using domain-specic ontologies to semantically annotate and retrieve ar-
ticles and extending the inquiries to search the full body of articles which
are becoming increasingly accessible due to the support for open access
publication.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge Ozgur Akyaz and S ahin Batmaz
for their eorts in implementing the prototype and the members of SosLab
and TABILAB of the Computer Engineering Department at Bogazici Uni-
versity for their valuable feedback throughout this work.
References
[1] Allen Institute for Articial Intelligence (AI2). Semantic scholar,
2015. https://www.semanticscholar.org [Accessed: 2019-10-01].
[2] Bethesda (MD): National Center for Biotechnology Information,
US. Pubmed Help, 2005. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK3827 [Updated 2019 July 25].
[3] Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. Natural language pro-
cessing with Python: analyzing text with the natural language toolkit .
O'Reilly Media, Inc., 2009.
[4] Olivier Bodenreider. A day in the life of PubMed: analysis of a
typical day's query log. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association (JAMIA) , 14(2):212220, 2007.
[5] Elsevier. Scopus discovery platform, 2019. https://www.scopus.com
[Accessed: 2019-10-10].
[6] Nicolas Fiorini, Kathi Canese, Rostyslav Bryzgunov, Ievgeniia
Radetska, Asta Gindulyte, Martin Latterner, Vadim Miller, Maxim
Osipov, Michael Kholodov, Grisha Starchenko, Evgeny Kireev, and
Zhiyong Lu. PubMed Labs: An experimental system for improving
biomedical literature search. Database , 2018:1{8, 09 2018. Article
id:bay094.
13[7] Lu Z Fiorini N, Lipman DJ. Towards PubMed 2.0. Elife, 6(e28801),
2017.
[8] Paul Fontelo, Fang Liu, and Michael Ackerman. askMEDLINE: a
free-text, natural language query tool for MEDLINE/PubMed. BMC
Medical Informatics and Decision Making , 5(1):5, 2005.
[9] Leon French, Suzanne Lane, Lydia Xu, Celia Siu, Cathy Kwok, Yiqi
Chen, Claudia Krebs, and Paul Pavlidis. Application and evalua-
tion of automated methods to extract neuroanatomical connectivity
statements from free text. Bioinformatics , 28(22):2963{2970, 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts542 .
[10] Leon French, Po Liu, Olivia Marais, Tianna Koreman, Lucia Tseng,
Artemis Lai, and Paul Pavlidis. Text mining for neuroanatomy us-
ing whitetext with an updated corpus and a new web application.
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics , 9(13), 2015.
[11] Erin c G okdeniz, Arzucan Ozg ur, and Re sit Canbeyli. Automated
neuroanatomical relation extraction: A linguistically motivated ap-
proach with a PVT connectivity graph case study. Frontiers in neu-
roinformatics , 10(39), 2016.
[12] Google Inc. Google scholar, 2004. https://scholar.google.com
[Accessed: 2019-08-11].
[13] The PostgreSQL Global Development Group. Postgresql: The
world's most advanced open source database, 1996-2019. https:
//www.postgresql.org [Accessed: 2019-10-01]].
[14] R. Islamaj Dogan, G. C. Murray, A. Nvol, and Z. Lu. Understanding
PubMed user search behavior through log analysis. Database: The
Journal of Biological Databases and Curation , bap018, 2009.
[15] A Keepanasseril. PubMed alternatives to search MEDLINE: An en-
vironmental scan. Indian Journal Dental Research , 25(4):527{34,
2014.
[16] Nir Levine, Haggai Roitman, and Doron Cohen. An extended rel-
evance model for session search. In Proceedings of the 40th Inter-
national ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval , SIGIR '17, pages 865{868, New York, NY,
USA, 2017. ACM.
[17] Z Lu. PubMed and beyond: a survey of web tools for searching
biomedical literature. Database : the journal of biological databases
and curation , baq036, 2011.
[18] Meta. Meta: Science discovery platform, 2019. https://meta.org
[Accessed: 2019-10-10].
[19] Michael Muin, Paul Fontelo, and Michael Ackerman. PubMed in-
teract: an interactive search application for MEDLINE/PubMed.
2006:1039, 2006.
[20] Ole Norgaard and Jerey V Lazarus. Searching PubMed during a
pandemic. PloS one , 5(4):e10039, 2010.
14[21] Sayers E. A general introduction to the e-utilities { entrez program-
ming utilities help, 2010. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK25497/ [Accessed: 2019-10-16].
[22] Christophe Van Gysel, Evangelos Kanoulas, and Maarten de Rijke.
Lexical query modeling in session search. In Proceedings of the 2016
ACM International Conference on the Theory of Information Re-
trieval , ICTIR '16, pages 69{72, New York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM.
[23] Beatriz Vincent, Maurice Vincent, and Carlos Gil Ferreira. Mak-
ing PubMed searching simple: learning to retrieve medical literature
through interactive problem solving. The Oncologist , 11(3):243{51,
2006.
15