Title: Novel Advancements in Three-Dimensional Neural Tissue Engineering and
  Regenerative Medicine
Abstract:   Neurological diseases and injuries present some of the greatest challenges in
modern medicine, often causing irreversible and lifelong burdens in the people
whom they afflict. These diagnoses have devastating consequences on millions of
people each year, and yet there are currently no therapies or interventions
that can repair the structure of neural circuits and restore neural tissue
function in the brain and spinal cord. Despite the challenges of overcoming
these limitations, there are many new approaches under development that hold
much promise. Neural tissue engineering aims to restore and influence the
function of damaged or diseased neural tissue generally through the use of stem
cells and biomaterials. In this paper, several new 3D tissue constructs and
designs are described for functional reconstruction of neural architecture.
With the use of induced pluripotent stem cells or induced neuronal cells, these
3D constructs could then be studied as regional models of the central nervous
system or could one day be implemented as autologous grafts into damaged sites
of the nervous system in order to restore neural function, particularly for
damaged sites of spinal cord, areas of stroke infarction, tumor resection
sites, peripheral nerve injuries, or areas of neurodegeneration.

Full Text: Novel Advancements in Three-Dimensional Neural Tiss ue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine 
 
Richard J. McMurtrey 1,2  
 
1 Institute of Neural Regeneration & Tissue Engineer ing, Highland, UT 84003, United States 
Email: richard.mcmurtrey@neuralregeneration.org  
 
2 Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Department of  Engineering Science, Old Road Campus Research Buil ding, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom Email: richard.mcmurtrey@eng.oxon.org  
 
Keywords: Neural Tissue Engineering, Neural Regener ation, 3D Cell Culture, Organoids, Nanofiber Scaffo lds, Hydrogels 
 
 
This is an author-created version of an open access  article published in Neural Regeneration Research and deposited under the Open Access 
Initiative (OAI) for OAI-conforming disciplinary ar chives and institutional repositories. Any further distribution of this work must maintain 
attribution to the author, title of the work, and j ournal citation. The Version of Record is available  online at 
http://www.nrronline.org/text.asp?2015/10/3/352/153 674 . Reference: McMurtrey RJ. Novel advancements in thr ee-dimensional neural 
tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. Neura l Regen Res 2015;10:352-4. 
 
 
Neurological diseases and injuries present some of the greatest challenges in modern medicine, often c ausing 
irreversible and lifelong burdens in the people who m they afflict. Conditions of stroke, traumatic bra in injury, spinal 
cord injury, and neurodegenerative diseases have de vastating consequences on millions of people each y ear, and yet 
there are currently no therapies or interventions t hat can repair the structure of neural circuits and  restore neural 
tissue function in the brain and spinal cord. Despi te the challenges of overcoming these limitations, there are many 
new approaches under development that hold much pro mise. Neural tissue engineering aims to restore and  
influence the function of damaged or diseased neura l tissue generally through the use of stem cells an d biomaterials. 
Many types of biomaterials may be implemented in va rious designs to influence the survival, differenti ation, and 
function of developing stem cells, as well as to gu ide neurite extension and morphological architectur e of cell 
cultures. Such designs may aim to recapitulate the cellular interactions, extracellular matrix charact eristics, 
biochemical factors, and sequences of events that o ccur in neurodevelopment, in addition to supporting  cell survival, 
differentiation, and integration into innate neural  tissue. 
 
Much work has been done on patterning axonal guidan ce and neurite outgrowth on two-dimensional (2D) su rfaces, 
but recent work has now demonstrated the ability to  pattern neurite extension in three-dimensional (3D ) cultures 
using a combination of functionalized nanofiber sca ffolding embedded within hydrogel architecture (McM urtrey, 
2014). This study demonstrated that nanofibers coul d be aligned and patterned using an external scaffo lding, and the 
nanofiber scaffolding could be embedded within a ce llularized hydrogel architecture to create composit e 3D neural 
tissue constructs. It was then shown that different iated neuronal cells within the hydrogel extended n eurites that 
directly tracked along nanofibers, particularly tho se nanofibers that had been functionalized with lam inin and 
embedded in hyaluronic acid hydrogels, thus resulti ng in significant overall alignment of neurites wit h nanofibers in 
three dimensions. It was also shown that laminin-co ated nanofibers in hyaluronic acid hydrogels could significantly 
enhance the length of neurite extensions. In this s tudy, even non-functionalized polymer nanofibers we re able to 
exert some amount of control over neurite tracking and angle orientation, and although these effects w ere further 
enhanced by laminin functionalization of the fibers , these results suggest that topographical cues alo ne can also 
influence neurite extension and cell behavior. The mechanisms of this phenomenon are still not well un derstood, but 
similar effects have been observed in a variety of cell types (Kim et al., 2012), and in neuronal cell s this effect may 
relate to the ability to extend along radial glial cells in early neurodevelopment. This work suggests  that high-
resolution patterning of scaffolds within 3D hydrog els is not only possible but provides highly advant ageous 
capabilities in exerting directional control of neu rite extension in 3D mediums and producing desired details in the 
structure of engineered neural tissue.  
 
The function of neural tissue is highly dependent o n its intricate 3D architecture at the cellular and  subcellular levels, 
and therefore for neural cells in particular, 3D cu lture is necessary to form the unique relationship of structure and Neural Regen. Res. 2015;10:352-4  R.J. McMurtrey  
2 
 function in neural tissue. Furthermore, unlike 2D c ultures, 3D cultures enable realistic reconstructio n of biochemical 
gradients and interactions among surrounding cells and extracellular matrix. 3D constructs can simulat e mass 
transfer characteristics reminiscent of neural tiss ue, which may help cells adapt for implantation int o the harsh 
conditions of the body—recent evidence suggests tha t stem cells implanted into the body may have bette r survival if 
they are cultured and prepared under certain condit ions of stress or exposure, a form of preconditioni ng cells (Sart et 
al., 2014), and culturing cells in 3D conditions wi th limited diffusion capacities is one way of accom plishing 
environmental preconditioning. Diffusion characteri stics may be modeled for each construct design and may also be 
improved for diffusion-limited constructs through a  variety of means, such as bioreactor design and hy drogel 
constructs designed with perfusion vents or vascula r-like channels.  
 
A particularly useful method for creating 3D cultur es involves the use of hydrogels, which provide an aqueous 
dispersion medium within natural or synthetic matri x molecules. Hydrogels provide the advantage of sup porting 
structural relations among cells, preventing anoiki s, and precluding cells from washing away into medi a or 
cerebrospinal fluid, while also delivering controll able concentrations of ions, nutrients, and growth factors. 
Hydrogels generally have a low elastic modulus that  can be tuned to simulate the stiffness of neural t issue by means 
of cross-linking and polymer type and density, whic h can thereby influence the differentiation of cell  lineages 
(Aurand et al., 2012). These design choices also af fect the biocompatibility and degradation rate of t he construct, and 
therefore must be optimized to avoid foreign body r eactions and enable biodegradation as constructs ar e replaced by 
new tissue formation, but constructs should also en dure long enough that they support the survival and  integration 
of newly implanted cells. Hyaluronic acid is one go od choice for neural tissue due to its cross-linkin g capabilities and 
its natural involvement in neurodevelopment and pre sence around neurons, and cross-linked hyaluronan h ydrogels 
have already been used to enhance survival of neura l stem cells implanted in the central nervous syste m (Liang et al., 
2013; Moshayedi & Carmichael, 2013). Although hyalu ronan hydrogels by themselves do not provide high-a ffinity 
cell attachment sites, the inclusion of functionali zed nanofibers can serve as cell attachment scaffol ding that directs 
neurite outgrowth along the fibers. Conversely, Mat rigel possesses abundant cell attachment molecules throughout 
the hydrogel, which likely explains why lower direc t neurite tracking of functionalized fibers seems t o occur in 
Matrigel constructs, and which suggests that hydrog el choice and overall construct design can greatly influence the 
outcome of neural structure and morphology (McMurtr ey, 2014).  
 
 
 
Figure 1: 3D neural tissue constructs.  Row 1 – 
Neuronal cultures in 3D hydrogels can be form ed 
in a variety of shapes and designs. Row 2 – 
Regional identities and neurite extensions can be 
patterned with signaling factors and nanofiber 
architecture embedded within the hydrogel. Row 
3 – 3D tissue and organoid models will provide 
incredible new tools and insights into 
neurodevelopment and neurological injury and 
disease, as well as great potential for 
regenerating functional neural tissue from stem 
cells. [Images used with permission of the 
Institute of Neural Regeneration & Tissue 
Engineering.] Neural Regen. Res. 2015;10:352-4  R.J. McMurtrey  
3 
 Early attempts at creating neural tissue from pluri potent stem cells focused primarily on the optimal combination of 
signaling factors in 2D cultures, but many of these  attempts were only partially successful, with neur al tissue failing 
to achieve proper cellular structure, organize syna ptic networks, express complete molecular markers, or mature in 
electrophysiological function (Hansen et al., 2011) . The maturation from human pluripotent stem cells into cell types 
from all layers of the adult human cortex was then demonstrated in 2D cultures, wherein the maturation  process was 
shown to recapitulate that which occurs in normal d evelopment, with deep layer VI neurons maturing fir st and 
upper layer II/III neurons later, then finally the differentiation of astrocytes and formation of func tional synaptic 
connections reminiscent of early innate cortical ne tworks (Shi et al., 2012). Subsequently, 3D hydroge l cultures of 
pluripotent stem cells were shown to enable the for mation of neuroanatomical structures that are simpl y not possible 
in 2D cultures, and it seems that the cells themsel ves possess innately-programmed capabilities to sel f-assemble at 
least some aspects of neuroanatomical structures ev en in unpatterned hydrogel constructs (Lancaster et  al., 2013). 
These structures comprised ventricular, hippocampal , retinal, and cortical regions, including spatiall y separated 
upper and lower layers of cortex, and, owing to the  observed multicellular differentiation and spatial  organization 
characteristic of whole organs, these structures ha ve been termed “cerebral organoids.” Although these  constructs 
can serve as models of organogenesis, fully mature neural structures along with the full composition o f central 
nervous system cell types still remain incomplete o r only partially developed, and although the neuron s in these 3D 
organoids were shown to develop spontaneous activit y, further synaptic characterization and network fu nctionality 
has yet to be examined. The formation of functional  networks is dependent on excitatory neurons, inhib itory 
neurons, and glial cell types, and because these ce ll types arise from different regions or at differe nt stages of 
development, enabling the desired cell types to for m appropriate spatial structures at appropriate tim es is a difficult 
challenge. It is not yet known to what extent neura l networks can be functionally established in 3D co nstructs, or 
whether 3D constructs can be used to help integrate  functional neural networks into the prohibitive in vivo  central 
nervous system environment, but the ability to repl icate neuroanatomical structures and guide neural n etwork 
formation in three dimensions, both in vitro  and in vivo , would be a major advance in the field of neural r egeneration.  
 
The formation of neuroanatomical structures at the cellular and subcellular levels will likely depend on a 
combination of cellular, biochemical, and structura l cues that can guide desired axis patterning, regi onal identity, and 
cellular architecture. Because hydrogels and nanofi bers can provide these components, an ideal approac h for 
reconstructing structural and functional components  of neural tissue may therefore include the integra tion of 
scaffolding and hydrogel into singular 3D construct s. Specific gradients and concentrations of signali ng factors can 
be integrated into hydrogels, and nanofibers can be  coated with a variety of factors that influence ce ll attachment, 
survival, growth, differentiation, migration, and n eurite extension. Nanofibers may also be functional ized with 
pharmacologic agents that elute and diffuse from th e fibers to create localized gradients within the h ydrogel, or 
agents that are chemically coupled to the fibers so  that regional concentrations remain tightly contro lled. Such 
composite hydrogel constructs may be functionalized  to minimize foreign-body reactions and enhance int egration 
into neural tissue, and the hydrogel architecture a lso provides stabilizing protection of neuroglial c ell cultures during 
early structural development and during stages of t ransplantation and grafting. Also, it has been reco gnized that 
adverse side effects of pain or spasticity might re sult from some spinal cord regeneration effects (Tu szynski & 
Steward, 2012), but targeted connections of axonal and dendritic pathways and suppression of unwanted connections 
might be achieved through the use of patterned scaf folding that can guide neural pathways at the cellu lar and 
subcellular levels. Even unpatterned fibrin scaffol ds have shown significant capabilities in enhancing  functional 
axonal extensions across long-distance lesions in r at spinal cord injuries (Lu et al., 2012), which fu rther suggests that 
the integration of cellularized hydrogels and patte rned scaffolding constructs may provide significant  benefits for 
successful reconstruction of functional neural tiss ue in patients. 
 
The ability to use a patient’s own pluripotent stem  cells to replicate regional components of neurodev elopment and 
rebuild neuroanatomical structures in 3D will not o nly provide a tremendous new tool for the successfu l 
implementation of regenerative medicine, but will a lso enable detailed study of complex neurodevelopme ntal 
processes, neurite guidance systems, and pathologic al conditions, including neurodegenerative diseases  (Choi et al., 
2014) and neurogenetic diseases (Lancaster et al., 2013), particularly for diseases that are not easil y characterized in 
animals and for processes and neuroanatomical organ izations that appear unique in humans, such as regi ons of 
neural progenitor zones and activity of radial glia . These 3D constructs can also serve as useful mode ls of traumatic  
injury and pharmacological or toxicological testing . The concept of using functionalized scaffolding w ithin hydrogels Neural Regen. Res. 2015;10:352-4  R.J. McMurtrey  
4 
 for neural tissue architecture can now be scaled up  to create more intricate structures that better re plicate the 
complexity of innate neuroanatomical structures, su ch as those of the cortex, spinal cord, hippocampus , or other 
regions. For example, the formation of multi-layere d cortex may be guided with layered nanofibers, wit h upper 
layers designed to promote intracortical connection s and lower layers functionalized and shaped to pro mote deep 
projections. Likewise, hippocampal anatomy may be f ormed with hydrogel architecture and nanofiber scaf folding 
that guides perforant, collateral, and commissural pathways. Similarly, spinal cord anatomy could be r econstructed 
with specific tracts and decussations guided by nan ofiber scaffolding through hydrogel. With the use o f induced 
pluripotent stem cells or induced neuronal cells, t hese 3D constructs could then be studied as regiona l models of the 
central nervous system or could one day be implemen ted as autologous grafts into damaged sites of the nervous 
system in order to restore neural function, particu larly for damaged sites of spinal cord, areas of st roke infarction, 
tumor resection sites, peripheral nerve injuries, o r areas of neurodegeneration.  
 
References 
 
Aurand ER, Lampe KJ, Bjugstad KB. Defining and desi gning polymers and hydrogels for neural tissue engi neering. Neurosci Res. 
2012 72(3), 199-213.  
 
Choi SH, Kim YH, Hebisch M, Sliwinski C, Lee S, D'A vanzo C, Chen H, Hooli B, Asselin C, Muffat J, Klee  JB, Zhang C, Wainger BJ, 
Peitz M, Kovacs DM, Woolf CJ, Wagner SL, Tanzi RE, Kim DY. A three-dimensional human neural cell cultu re model of 
Alzheimer's disease. Nature. 2014 Nov 13;515(7526): 274-8.  
 
Hansen DV, Rubenstein JL, Kriegstein AR. Deriving e xcitatory neurons of the neocortex from pluripotent  stem cells. Neuron. 2011 
May 26;70(4):645-60.  
 
Kim DH, Provenzano PP, Smith CL, Levchenko A. Matri x nanotopography as a regulator of cell function. J  Cell Biol. 2012 Apr 
30;197(3):351-60.  
 
Lancaster MA, Renner M, Martin CA, Wenzel D, Bickne ll LS, Hurles ME, Homfray T, Penninger JM, Jackson AP, Knoblich JA. 
Cerebral organoids model human brain development an d microcephaly. Nature. 2013 Sep 19;501(7467):373-9 .  
 
Liang Y, Walczak P, Bulte JW. The survival of engra fted neural stem cells within hyaluronic acid hydro gels. Biomaterials. 2013 
Jul;34(22):5521-9.  
 
Lu P, Wang Y, Graham L, McHale K, Gao M, Wu D, Broc k J, Blesch A, Rosenzweig ES, Havton LA, Zheng B, C onner JM, Marsa la M, 
Tuszynski MH. Long-distance growth and connectivity  of neural stem cells after severe spinal cord inju ry. Cell. 2012 Sep 
14;150(6):1264-73.  
 
McMurtrey RJ. Patterned and functionalized nanofibe r scaffolds in three-dimensional hydrogel construct s enhance neurite 
outgrowth and directional control. J Neural Eng. 20 14 Oct 31;11(6):066009.  
 
Moshayedi P, Carmichael ST. Hyaluronan, neural stem  cells and tissue reconstruction after acute ischem ic stroke. Biomatter. 2013 
Jan-Mar;3(1). pii: e23863.  
 
Sart S, Ma T, Yan Li Y. Preconditioning Stem Cells for In Vivo Delivery. BioResearch Open Access 2014 3(4), 137-149. 
 
Shi Y, Kirwan P, Smith J, Robinson HP, Livesey FJ. Human cerebral cortex development from pluripotent stem cells to functional 
excitatory synapses. Nat Neurosci. 2012 15(3), 477- 86. 
 
Tuszynski MH, Steward O. Concepts and methods for t he study of axonal regeneration in the CNS. Neuron.  2012 Jun 7;74(5):777-91.  
 