Title: Pluripotency, differentiation, and reprogramming: A gene expression
  dynamics model with epigenetic feedback regulation
Abstract:   Characterization of pluripotent states, in which cells can both self-renew
and differentiate, and the irreversible loss of pluripotency are important
research areas in developmental biology. In particular, an understanding of
these processes is essential to the reprogramming of cells for biomedical
applications, i.e., the experimental recovery of pluripotency in differentiated
cells. Based on recent advances in dynamical-systems theory for gene
expression, we propose a gene-regulatory-network model consisting of several
pluripotent and differentiation genes. Our results show that cellular-state
transition to differentiated cell types occurs as the number of cells
increases, beginning with the pluripotent state and oscillatory expression of
pluripotent genes. Cell-cell signaling mediates the differentiation process
with robustness to noise, while epigenetic modifications affecting gene
expression dynamics fix the cellular state. These modifications ensure the
cellular state to be protected against external perturbation, but they also
work as an epigenetic barrier to recovery of pluripotency. We show that
overexpression of several genes leads to the reprogramming of cells, consistent
with the methods for establishing induced pluripotent stem cells. Our model,
which involves the inter-relationship between gene expression dynamics and
epigenetic modifications, improves our basic understanding of cell
differentiation and reprogramming.

Full Text: Pluripotency, differentiation, and reprogramming: A gene
expression dynamics model with epigenetic feedback
regulation
Tadashi Miyamoto1, Chikara Furusawa2, Kunihiko Kaneko1, *
1 Department of Basic Science, The University of Tokyo, Meguro-ku,
Tokyo, Japan
2 Laboratory for Multiscale Biosystem Dynamics, Quantitative Biology
Center, RIKEN, Suita, Osaka, Japan
* kaneko@complex.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract
Embryonic stem cells exhibit pluripotency: they can differentiate into all types of
somatic cells. Pluripotent genes such as Oct4 andNanog are activated in the
pluripotent state, and their expression decreases during cell differentiation. Inversely,
expression of differentiation genes such as Gata6 andGata4 is promoted during
differentiation. The gene regulatory network controlling the expression of these genes
has been described, and slower-scale epigenetic modifications have been uncovered.
Although the differentiation of pluripotent stem cells is normally irreversible,
reprogramming of cells can be experimentally manipulated to regain pluripotency via
overexpression of certain genes. Despite these experimental advances, the dynamics and
mechanisms of differentiation and reprogramming are not yet fully understood. Based
on recent experimental findings, we constructed a simple gene regulatory network
including pluripotent and differentiation genes, and we demonstrated the existence of
pluripotent and differentiated states from the resultant dynamical-systems model. Two
differentiation mechanisms, interaction-induced switching from an expression oscillatory
state and noise-assisted transition between bistable stationary states, were tested in the
model. The former was found to be relevant to the differentiation process. We also
introduced variables representing epigenetic modifications, which controlled the
threshold for gene expression. By assuming positive feedback between expression levels
and the epigenetic variables, we observed differentiation in expression dynamics.
Additionally, with numerical reprogramming experiments for differentiated cells, we
showed that pluripotency was recovered in cells by imposing overexpression of two
pluripotent genes and external factors to control expression of differentiation genes.
Interestingly, these factors were consistent with the four Yamanaka factors, Oct4, Sox2,
Klf4, and Myc, which were necessary for the establishment of induced pluripotent cells.
These results, based on a gene regulatory network and expression dynamics, contribute
to our wider understanding of pluripotency, differentiation, and reprogramming of cells,
and they provide a fresh viewpoint on robustness and control during development.
Author Summary
Characterization of pluripotent states, in which cells can both self-renew and
differentiate, and the irreversible loss of pluripotency are important research areas in
1/29arXiv:1508.00686v1  [q-bio.MN]  4 Aug 2015developmental biology. In particular, an understanding of these processes is essential to
the reprogramming of cells for biomedical applications, i.e., the experimental recovery of
pluripotency in differentiated cells. Based on recent advances in dynamical-systems
theory for gene expression, we propose a gene-regulatory-network model consisting of
several pluripotent and differentiation genes. Our results show that cellular-state
transition to differentiated cell types occurs as the number of cells increases, beginning
with the pluripotent state and oscillatory expression of pluripotent genes. Cell-cell
signaling mediates the differentiation process with robustness to noise, while epigenetic
modifications affecting gene expression dynamics fix the cellular state. These
modifications ensure the cellular state to be protected against external perturbation,
but they also work as an epigenetic barrier to recovery of pluripotency. We show that
overexpression of several genes leads to the reprogramming of cells, consistent with the
methods for establishing induced pluripotent stem cells. Our model, which involves the
inter-relationship between gene expression dynamics and epigenetic modifications,
improves our basic understanding of cell differentiation and reprogramming.
Introduction
In multicellular organisms, cells that exhibit stemness during development can both
self-renew and differentiate into other cell types. In contrast, differentiated cells lose the
ability to further differentiate into other cell types and terminally differentiated cells
can only self-renew. Currently, how stemness and the irreversible loss of differentiation
potential are characterized by gene expression patterns and dynamics are key questions
in developmental biology.
Cells with stemness include embryonic stem cells (ESCs), which are derived from the
inner cell mass of a mammalian blastocyst and are pluripotent, i.e., they can
differentiate into all the types of somatic cells [1,2]. To maintain pluripotency,
pluripotent genes such as Pou5f1 (also known as Oct4 ) [3,4] and Nanog [5,6] are
activated in ESCs. Expression of these genes gradually decreases during cell
differentiation, whereas expression of differentiation marker genes increases.
Understanding these changes in gene expression patterns over the course of cell
differentiation is important for characterizing the loss of pluripotency.
During normal development, the loss of pluripotency is irreversible. However, the
recovery of pluripotency in differentiated cells was first achieved by experimental
manipulation in plants, and then in Xenopus laevis via cloning by Gurdon [7]. More
recently, the overexpression of four genes that are highly expressed in ECSs, Oct4, Sox2,
Klf4, and Myc (now termed Yamanaka factors), has been used to reprogram
differentiated cells. Overexpression of these genes leads to cellular-state transition and
changes in gene expression patterns, and the transition generates cells known as induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) [8]. Previous studies have also uncovered the gene
regulatory network (GRN) related to the differentiation and reprogramming of
cells [9,10].
To understand the differentiation process theoretically, Waddington proposed a
landscape scenario in which each stable cell-type is represented as a valley and the
differentiation process is represented as a ball rolling from the top of a hill down into
the valley [11]. In this scenario, the reprogramming process works inversely to push the
ball to the top of the hill [12{14].
As a theoretical representation of Waddington's landscape, the dynamical-systems
approach has been developed over several decades, pioneered by Kauffman [15] and
Goodwin [16]. In this approach, the cellular state is represented by a set of protein
expression levels with temporal changes that are given by GRNs. According to gene
expression dynamics, the cellular state is attracted to one of the stable states, which is
2/29termed an attractor. Each attractor is assumed to correspond to each cell type.
Indeed, this attractor view has become important for understanding the
diversification of cellular states and their robustness. Both theoretical and experimental
approaches have been developed to assign each cell-type to one of the multi-stable
states [17{19]. In these approaches, a pluripotent state is regarded as a stationary
attractor with relatively weak stability, and the loss of pluripotency is the transition by
noise to attractors with stronger stability.
An alternative approach investigated how the interplay between intra-cellular
dynamics and interaction leads to differentiation and the loss of pluripotency [20{23].
Specifically, the pluripotent state is represented by oscillatory states following the
expression dynamics of more genes, whereas the loss of pluripotency is represented by
the decrease in the degree of expressed genes necessary for oscillatory dynamics. Here,
differentiation is triggered by cell-cell interactions, which lead to robustness in
developmental paths and the final distribution of cell types [20,24,25]. By using several
GRNs, cells with oscillatory intracellular gene expression dynamics are found to
differentiate into other cell types by cell-cell interactions [21,26{28]. Indeed, the
recovery of pluripotency by gene overexpression is a process predicted to facilitate
recovery of lost degrees of freedom and oscillation [20]. However, of the question of
whether this theory applies to realistic GRNs has yet to be explored. Despite these
earlier studies, pluripotency has not yet been confirmed in a realistic GRN observed in
experiments, and the mechanism of reprogramming remains elusive.
Epigenetic modifications such as DNA methylation and histone modification are now
also recognized as important in cell differentiation. Epigenetic change solidifies
differentiated-cellular states by altering chromatin structure to generate
transcriptionally active and inactive regions [29,30]. With epigenetic change, the
activity of gene expression is preserved in a process known as epigenetic memory [31].
Indeed, epigenetic modification is suggested as a barrier to reprogramming [32].
However, the theoretical inter-relationship between expression dynamics and epigenetic
modification has yet to be fully explored.
The aim of the present study was three-fold. First, by using GRNs obtained from a
previous experimental study, we examined the validity of two differentiation scenarios: 1)
oscillation + cell-cell interaction and 2) multistability + noise. Second, to demonstrate
that differentiation by gene expression dynamics is solidified by epigenetic modification,
we introduced a mathematical model for epigenetic feedback regulation. Third, we
investigated how overexpression of some genes leads to reprogramming, i.e., regaining
pluripotency from differentiated states (scenario 1) by initializing epigenetic changes.
Below, we have first introduced a simple model extracted from an experimentally
observed GRN. This model consists of several genes, including pluripotent and
differentiation genes, with mutual activation and inhibition. We then examined the
oscillatory dynamics and multistable states scenarios to show that differentiation with
the loss of pluripotency progresses from a stem cell state with oscillatory expression
through cell-cell interactions. Additionally, the two scenarios were compared with
regard to their robustness to noise and the regulation of the ratio of differentiated cells.
We also investigated the epigenetic process by introducing variables that give the
threshold for the expression of genes to demonstrate that the cellular state derived from
gene expression dynamics is fixed by epigenetic feedback regulation. Differentiation by
gene expression is fixed according to these threshold variables; thus, the pluripotent and
differentiated states are fixed.
Finally, we investigated reprogramming by temporally imposing overexpression of
genes and examining whether the differentiated state is reversed to the pluripotent state.
Via overexpression of several genes, epigenetic fixation was relaxed and the expression
levels and dynamics of the pluripotent state were recovered. This reprogramming was
3/29shown to require the overexpression of several genes, including pluripotent genes, over a
sufficient period beyond the time scale of epigenetic fixation. Indeed, by using a model
with five relevant genes, we found that four genes corresponding to the Yamanaka
factors must be overexpressed for reprogramming to occur. It was also demonstrated
that insufficient overexpression of genes, i.e., overexpression of pluripotent genes only,
results in partially reprogrammed cells (which, experimentally, are known as pre-iPSCs).
Construction of GRN model
In the pluripotent state, cells can proliferate and retain their potentiality for
differentiation. The expression of pluripotent genes is necessary for pluripotency, but it
is not always sufficient. In the differentiation process, expression of pluripotent genes
gradually decreases, while expression of differentiation marker genes increases. These
temporal changes are a result of gene-gene regulation, which can be integrated as a
GRN consisting of pluripotent and differentiation genes.
Here, we adopted the GRN reported by Dunn et al. [33] (Fig. 1) and produced
simplified models by compressing some paths and genes while maintaining the structure
of the GRN (see Models).
Results
Single cell dynamics
Using the four-gene model (Fig. 1C), we first present the behavior of single-cell
dynamics. Depending on the parameter Kij, which gives the strength of activation or
inhibition from gene jto genei, there are three possible behaviors: (i) fixed-point
attractor with high expression of pluripotent genes (FP), given by a fixed-point x11;
(ii) fixed-point attractor with high expression of differentiation genes (FD), given by a
fixed-point x10; and (iii) the oscillatory state (O), in which all expression levels show
temporal cycles (Fig. 2). These three states appear as attractors depending on the
parameter values Kij.
Because the expression level of pluripotent gene x1is most important for determining
the three states, the regulation of gene x1, which is controlled by the parameter K1j, is
crucial for determining cellular behavior. In particular, threshold K11andK13were
found to be critical parameters. Where the value of K11was low, expression of gene x1
was promoted; where the value of K13was low, gene x1was suppressed. First of all, we
set all parameters Kijrandomly, and examined the dynamics. If the parameter value of
K11(K13) was set to a much lower (larger) value (say 0 :1 (1:0), respectively), the
expression of x1is fixed to a high value, and the differentiation process would be more
difficult. On the other hand, if this parameter value was high (low), x1was not easily
expressed or always expressed, respectively, so that the stem cell state is difficult to be
obtained unless other parameter values are finely tuned. With the neighborhood of the
above parameters values, the expression level of x1changes flexibly to other parameters.
We then observed that the expression dynamics changed between fixed-point and
oscillation easily by changing other parameter values. Indeed, as will be shown,
differentiation behavior was observed for a broader range of other parameters. As the
parameter space is so huge, we here fixed K11andK13at these values and drew the
phase diagram against other parameters. For the parameters K11andK13, for example
K11= 0:35;K13= 0:78, gene expression levels showed oscillation.
To study FP, FD, and O, i.e., the three states described above, we fixed the
parameters K11andK1j(for specific values, see Models), and assessed dependence on
the other three parameters K34,K42, andK43(Fig. 3). In most parameter regions, two
4/29Figure 1. Gene regulatory network. A: The GRN is inferred as a core
pluripotency network by Dunn et al. [33]. It includes pluripotent transcription factors
such as Oct4 andNanog . In this paper, we first picked up only the eleven genes depicted
by cyan nodes, which are considered to be relevant to pluripotency and reprogramming,
and include those concerned with Yamanaka four factors, while experimentally
confirmed interactions among them as depicted by blue edges are adopted [9]. We then
reduced them to four or five nodes, by compressing a linear chain part A !B!C to
A!C, or A!BaC to AaC, where!represents activation and ainhibition. B:
The five-gene simplified model. The regulator from Oct4 toKlf2 is compressed into
that fromx2tox4, while the regulator from Rex1 toKlf2 is compressed into that from
x3tox4, wherex1,x2,x3,x4, andx5correspond to Nanog, Oct4, Gata6, Gata4 , and
Klf4, respectively. C: The four-gene model, consisting of two pluripotent (red; x1;x2)
and differentiation (green; x3;x4) marker genes, in which the positive feedback from x5
tox1is replaced by auto-regulation. In all diagrams, arrow-headed and T-headed lines
represent positive and negative regulation, respectively.
attractors (stable states) existed, either FP+FD or FD+O depending on the initial
conditions. Where the initial condition involved high expression of pluripotent genes,
FP or O was reached depending on the parameters; where the initial condition involved
high expression of differentiation genes, FD was reached.
For higher values of K34andK43, gene-expression oscillation, i.e., the oscillatory
state, did not appear, and FP and FD coexisted. Conversely, for lower values of K34
andK43, the oscillatory state appeared for 0 :1<K 42<0:5 if pluripotent genes were
initially highly expressed. However, where differentiation genes were initially highly
expressed, cells fell into FD; thus, FD and O coexisted. As an example of the oscillatory
pluripotent state, we fixed the parameters at K34= 0:45,K42= 0:30, andK43= 0:45
for most of the simulations described below.
For oscillatory gene expression, negative feedback is generally required. In our
model, negative feedback of gene x1exists through genes x2,x3, andx4. For the
parameter values that generated oscillatory expression, O, auto-promotion and negative
feedback of gene x1(as the key factor in pluripotency) were balanced. Where either of
the two regulations was dominant, oscillation ceased and the cellular state fell into
5/29Figure 2. Time series of single-cell dynamics. Time series of gene expression for
x1,x2,x3, andx4. Each colored line represents expression levels of a single gene. Three
different behaviors appeared in single-cell dynamics depending on the parameter Kij.
We set the parameter K13at (A) 0:98, (B) 0:58, and (C) 0 :78. The other parameters
were fixed at K34= 0:45;K31= 0:94;K11= 0:35;K21= 0:80,K42= 0:30, and
K43= 0:45. A: The pluripotent genes x1andx2were highly expressed, and the
differentiation genes x3andx4were suppressed. This state corresponds to FP. B:
Pluripotent genes were suppressed, and differentiation genes were expressed. This state
corresponds to FD. C: Oscillation of gene expression occurred, and this state
corresponds to O.
either of FP or FD.
Differentiation with cell-cell interaction and noise
To understand developmental processes, we must investigate the switch from pluripotent
to differentiated states. This differentiation event can be mediated either by cell-cell
interactions (i.e., by chemicals from other cells) or by noise. Here we explored these two
possibilities.
Cell-cell interactions: Cell-cell interactions play an important role in cellular
differentiation. In the simplified GRN we adopted, gene x4corresponds to Gata4 .
According to Gene ontology database, only Gata4 among the four genes in the present
model concerns with the cell-cell signaling. Hence, we assumed the cell-cell interaction
viax4. Indeed, even if other factors xi(i6= 4) were assumed to diffuse, differentiation
by cell-cell interaction to be presented did not appear.
With an increase in the number of cells, differentiation began to occur with specific
timing. Following earlier studies [21,26], we used a model including the cell division
process and cell-cell interactions among divided cells. Here, cells divided according to a
certain division interval, t= 25, with the two resultant cells having the same gene
expression pattern xiwith the addition of some noise. Starting from a single cell
initially in the pluripotent state, i.e., x1;x2= 0:8 andx3;x4= 0:2, we investigated
whether the composition of cells changes. We studied two cases: (A) differentiation
from either of FP or FD, and (B) differentiation from the oscillatory state, O.
6/29Figure 3. The parameter set and emerging attractors. The horizontal and
vertical axes represent the values of parameters K34,K42, andK43(A:K42andK34, B:
K43andK34, C:K42andK43). Other parameters were set as in Fig. 2C. Each color
represents the type of attractors reached from the initial conditions at pluripotent
(x1;x2= 0:8,x3;x4= 0) and differentiated ( x1;x2= 0,x3;x4= 0:8) states. Brown,
green, and blue represent coexistence of FP and FD, coexistence of O and FD, and
existence of FD alone, respectively. For the coexistent cases, the cellular state fell into
FP or O by starting from the pluripotent condition, and fell into FD by starting from
the differentiated condition.
In (A), where the single-cell state was a fixed point with either expression of
pluripotent or differentiated genes, differentiation did not occur by cell-cell interaction,
irrespective of the diffusion coefficient D. The cellular state remained at the original
fixed point.
In (B), where differentiation began from the oscillatory gene expression state, with
an increase in cell numbers the oscillations of each cell were desynchronized given
sufficient strength of cell-cell interactions ( D> 2:0) (Fig. 4). With a further increase in
the number of cells, some cells lost the oscillation of pluripotent genes, which suppressed
the expression of pluripotent genes x1andx2and activated expression of differentiation
genesx3andx4. Hence, differentiation and a loss of pluripotency occurred. This process
of interaction-induced differentiation from the oscillatory state was first reported by
Furusawa and Kaneko [20], and then by Suzuki et al. in simpler gene expression network
models with fewer genes [26]. The mechanism of the process can be understood through
bifurcation theory [21]. After the number of cells reached a given value (e.g., 32), the
differentiated and pluripotent cells with oscillatory gene expression coexisted. The ratio
of differentiated cells to the total number of cells was almost independent in each run
beginning from the oscillatory state, even where noise was included in the division
process; thus, proportional regulation of differentiated cell types was achieved. The
ratio of differentiated cells increased with the diffusion coefficient of cell-cell interactions
D, and the time required for differentiation increased with this ratio (S1 Fig).
Stationary cellular states were stable given the inclusion of noise, as long as the noise
level was not too high. We also studied the influence of stochastic gene expression by
including a Gaussian white noise term with the amplitude in our model by using
Langevin equations (see Models). Here, as long as the strength of noise was not too
large (= 0:1), the oscillatory expression dynamics and differentiation ratio were not
altered. Even though gene expression dynamics were strongly perturbed and oscillation
was not clearly visible, the differentiation process still functioned (Fig. 5); hence,
differentiation from the pluripotent state (with the oscillatory state) was robust to noise.
Transition by noise: As an alternative scenario, we considered differentiation as
state transition by noise. Here, however, as long as the noise level was not too high
7/29Figure 4. Time series of gene expression with the occurrence of cell-cell
interactions. Time series of gene expression levels for x1,x2,x3, andx4for all cells,
where cells divided per period = 25 until time = 125 to generate 32 cells. Expression
levels of cells are plotted according to color, but most colors are overlaid and, therefore,
difficult to discern. The diffusion coefficient Dwas set atD= 2, and the other
parameter values are the same as those given in Fig. 2C. The oscillatory state has
pluripotency to allow for both self-renewal and differentiation. The oscillation of gene
expression was initially desynchronized, and then a few cells switched to the
differentiated state.
(<0:1), the pluripotent state was stable, and the transition to differentiated state did
not occur. For a much higher noise level ( 0:3), the pluripotent state was not stable.
In this case, the transition to the differentiated state occurred by noise, and this
occurred even without cell-cell interactions. However, all cells finally fell into the
differentiated state. Thus, pluripotent cells did not remain, and the ratio of pluripotent
to differentiated cells was not regulated. In addition, this level of noise might be too
high to be considered realistic as a model of gene expression dynamics.
By changing some parameter values in the model, a bifurcation occurred from a
fixed point with expression of pluripotent genes to the differentiated state. Therefore,
by changing the external condition it is possible to transition from the pluripotent to
the differentiated state. However, changing the external condition caused all cells to
simultaneously switch to the differentiated state, so that no cells with pluripotency
remained. In contrast, given oscillatory gene expression and cell-cell interactions, only
some of the cells differentiated from the oscillatory state, while others remained in the
pluripotent state. Hence, the coexistence of pluripotent and differentiated cells, with
irreversible loss of pluripotency, is possible by starting from the oscillatory state.
Compatibility of oscillatory and stochastic dynamics: Even if the strength of
noise is set at a large value (say, = 1:0), the differentiation by cell-cell interaction in
our model works well. Besides the noise during the expression dynamics, we have also
added noise in the division process. Indeed, even though the strength of noise in cell
division is large (say d= 1:0), the differentiation mechanism in our model still works
8/29Figure 5. Cellular state transition under noise. Time series of gene expression
levels forx1. Similar conditions to those described in Fig. 4 were adopted, except that a
Gaussian noise term with the amplitude = 0:1 was included. Expression levels of cells
are plotted according to color. Gene expression oscillation was irregular because of the
noise. Irreversible transition from the oscillatory pluripotent to the differentiated state
(x10) occurred for = 0:1.
well (S2 Fig).
Differentiation from the pluripotent state with epigenetic
modification
Cellular differentiation in multi-cellular organisms also involves epigenetic changes, such
as histone modification and DNA methylation, which stabilize differentiated states:
once differentiated, cells do not regain pluripotency even if the expression level is
perturbed. Hence, we introduced epigenetic modification into our model to strengthen
the stability of the differentiated state.
Currently, there is no definitive method for introducing the epigenetic process
because the precise molecular process of histone modification is difficult to implement in
a model with gene expression dynamics. However, it is possible to model the influence
of the epigenetic process on expression dynamics phenomenologically [34{38]. The
epigenetic process tends to fix the expression state; for example, when a given gene is
expressed for a given period, its expression tends to become fixed, and when it is not
expressed for a given period, it remains silenced. In other words, the threshold for
expression decreases or increases when the gene is expressed or suppressed over a given
time span, respectively.
Thus, we introduced epigenetic feedback regulation as a change in the threshold for
expression, which was previously given by the expression threshold parameter Kijin
our GRN model. Here, we replaced the parameter Kijwith an epigenetic variable ij(t),
which changes over time depending on expression levels. Consequently, the expression
level of the regulator xjaffects that of the regulatee xithrough this epigenetic variable.
This is given as dynamics as
_ij(t) =1
epi(ij ij(t) xj(t)): (1)
The threshold ij(t) is elevated to  ij, when the gene xjis not expressed (i.e.,
xj(t)0), whereas the threshold decreases to  ij xj(t) when the gene is fully
expressed, i.e., xj(t)1. Hence, the term  xj(t) represents epigenetic feedback, i.e.,
if genexjis expressed, it is more likely to be expressed; if it is not expressed, it is less
likely to be expressed. The term  ijthus represents the epigenetic barrier for genes
that are not expressed.
The strength of epigenetic fixation given by  ijgenerally depends on each
regulation. Since the expression of pluripotent genes in our model is highly variable, a
9/29higher value of  ijis required to fix their expression. Hence, we chose higher  ijvalues
for regulations associated with pluripotent genes. Specifically, epigenetic fixation
threshold values were set to 1 :0 for the pluripotent genes  31, 21, and  42, while they
were lowered to 0 :78 for the differentiation regulators  13;34;43.
For auto-regulation  11, the threshold value was set lower, e.g., at 0 :50, since
self-activation tightly fixes the expression with small  ij. This is because the genes to
regulate and to be regulated are identical. This was due to the simplification, which
included the self-activation (we examine the five-gene model without self-activation
below, in which all  ijfor pluripotent genes are set to 1 :0).
Given these parameters, we simulated our model with epigenetic feedback regulation
and studied dependence on the epigenetic variables epiand. Initially, we focused on
the epigenetic variable ij(0) =Kij, which was set with values for cases with (A)
fixed-point states and (B) the oscillatory state.
(A) Starting from a state with fixed-points: In this case, the epigenetic process
fixed its state, and no more changes were induced. Thus, in the case of bistable
fixed-points, the behavior was almost the same as in the non-epigenetic model. However,
by starting from a fixed point with expression of pluripotent genes, the expression
began to oscillate via the epigenetic feedback when the time scale epiwas small. This
did not cause cell differentiation, however, and the oscillation soon ceased before the cell
differentiated. Hence, the effect of epigenetic variables is minor in the bistable
fixed-point case.
(B) Starting from the oscillatory state: If the time scale of epiwas not too high
(the range is discussed below), the differentiation process initially progressed in the
same manner as observed without the epigenetic process. Later, however, the cellular
state was fixed at an undifferentiated or differentiated state by the change in the
epigenetic variable ij(t). After sufficient time, the oscillation of pluripotent genes was
lost, and the ability to differentiate was lost after division (Fig. 6). Whether or not
differentiation and fixation progressed depended on the time scale epiand the coupling
constant(Fig. 7, S3 Fig).
Even with weak cell-cell interactions (e.g., D= 1:5), where differentiation did not
occur without epigenetic feedback regulation, differentiation was sometimes mediated by
epigenetic regulation. For example, for D= 1:5, oscillation occurred over a period
sufficient to produce differentiated cells for 103<epi<104, but oscillation
disappeared, and the capacity for differentiation was lost (Fig. 7). If the time scale of
the epigenetic variable epidecreased ( epi<103) or increased ( epi>104),
differentiation did not occur.
As the interaction strength (D) increased, the range of epithat allowed for
differentiation also increased (Fig. 7). For D> 2:0, if the epigenetic fixation process was
slow (epi>103), cellular differentiation was fixed to both gene expression xiand to
epigenetic change ij(Fig. 7). However, if the time scale of the epigenetic variable
decreased ( epi<103), the cellular state was quickly fixed by epigenetic change, and
differentiation never occurred.
Furthermore, even without cell-cell interactions ( D= 0), cells switched from
pluripotent to differentiated states via the epigenetic process. However, in this case,
oscillation was later lost for all cells. Thus, all cells fell into the FD state together (with
a differentiation ratio of 1 :0), and coexistence of pluripotent and differentiated states
was not possible.
The addition of noise did not substantially change epigenetic modification. The time
scale of the epigenetic variable epiwas typically much larger than that of the noise
variablenoise. Thus, the stochastic variation was averaged out through the epigenetic
10/29Figure 6. Cell differentiation with the epigenetic variable. Time series of gene
expression levels for x1,x2,x3,x4, and the epigenetic threshold variables 11(t) and
13(t). Expression levels of cells are plotted according to color, but most colors are
overlaid and, therefore, difficult to discern. We set the parameters of the epigenetic
variable as follows: epi= 2:0103;= 0:1;ij= 1:0. The initial value of the
epigenetic variable ij(0) was set as Kijin the non-epigenetic model. The other
parameters are the same as those used in Fig. 4. First, gene expression oscillated, and
then the epigenetic variables in each cell changed gradually. 11(t) differentiated into
two groups, and in one of these x1approached 0.
fixation process, and once the epigenetic change had occurred, expression levels
stabilized to reduce the effect of noise. Therefore, the epigenetic process was robust to
noise (or further increased the robustness of the model to noise).
In summary, we added the epigenetic variable ij(t), to replace the expression
thresholdKij. The cellular state was fixed by these variables, and its stabilization was
enforced. Even if a large amount of noise was added, the cellular state was not
destabilized. Upon external perturbation of gene expression patterns, the cell quickly
returned to its original state after the change in the epigenetic threshold. Thus, the
epigenetic variable produced stabilization of the cellular state and irreversibility of cell
differentiation.
Reprogramming to the pluripotent state
Mature cells can be dedifferentiated into iPSCs by inducing Yamanaka factors [8].
Indeed, in dynamical-systems theory, such recovery of pluripotency was predicted as
cellular-state transition from a differentiated fixed-point to the pluripotent oscillatory
attractor induced by forced-expression of several genes [20]. Here we discuss the
conditions for reprogramming, i.e., switching cellular states by experimental
manipulation to regain pluripotency, in our model, also by taking the reversal of
epigenetic fixation into account.
First, we investigated reprogramming in the model without the epigenetic process.
In this case, differentiated cells were reprogrammed by externally increasing the
11/29Figure 7. Effect of the time scale of the epigenetic variable epi.Here, the
differentiation ratio is plotted against epi. We conducted a differentiation simulation by
running the epigenetic model 1000 times for each time scale, and then counted the
number of differentiated cells ( x10). The average differentiation ratio (i.e., the
vertical axis) represents the percentage of differentiated cells per simulation. To run the
simulations, we used identical values to those used in Fig. 6. A: Given strong cell-cell
interaction ( D= 2:0), our model showed differentiation without the epigenetic variable.
Thus, a large time scale did not negatively affect differentiation. However, given a
smaller time scale, cellular differentiation did not occur because the cellular state was
quickly fixed. B: Given weak cell-cell interaction ( D= 1:5), there was a peak around
the time scale of the epigenetic variable epi5:0103. If the time scale of epiwas
small (epi<103), the cellular state was quickly fixed and differentiation did not occur.
Conversely, if the time scale epiwas large (epi>104), oscillation remained in place.
expression of the pluripotent genes instantaneously, i.e., increasing the value of x1.
Instantaneous increase in the expression was sufficient here, since the cellular state is
represented only by the expression levels of xi. In order to stabilize the differentiated
states against perturbations and sustain irreversibility of cell differentiation, the classic
model including only gene expression dynamics is insufficient (see also [39] ). By
introducing epigenetic feedback regulation with a different time scale, we succeeded in
obtaining the result consistent with reprogramming experiments.
In the model with the epigenetic process, however, differentiated cells were not
reprogrammed by an instantaneous increase in xi. Following overexpression, cells
quickly returned to the differentiated fixed-point. This is because the epigenetic
variable, which cannot be altered over a short period, was already increased so that
expression of pluripotent genes could not be recovered by instantaneous, or short-term,
overexpression. Indeed, we examined the instantaneous overexpression of each gene, as
well as a combination of several genes, but reprogramming never occurred.
We then introduced the overexpression of pluripotent genes into a differentiated cell
over a sufficiently long time span Te. For example, pluripotent genes were
overexpressed from t= 1 toTe= 100 to the level of xi= 15. Additionally, we added
external activation of gene x4to inhibit the expression of gene x3(Fig. 8). In this case,
cells were reprogrammed, and gene expression levels regained oscillation and recovered
pluripotency. The expression threshold was also reduced (Fig. 9), so that epigenetic
fixation was relaxed. By starting with this reprogrammed cell, some of the divided cells
differentiated given a sufficient level of cell-cell interaction.
After overexpression of xito the value xefor time span Te, the epigenetic variable
ij(t) was estimated to decrease to xeTe
epi. Hence, epigenetic fixation is relaxed if
this value reaches ij(0), whereij(0) is the value after epigenetic fixation. Where
epi= 5:010 4and= 0:1, for example, xeTemust be larger than 3 :0105for
11(t) to return to the initial value 0 :35. For example, if the overexpression value is
12/29Figure 8. The gene regulatory network in the reprogramming simulation.
We overexpressed the pluripotent genes x1andx2, and added an external stimulus ex1
to activate gene x4in the four-gene network model (see Fig. 1C). This induction
triggered reprogramming, and cells started to oscillate once again. These reprogramming
factors correspond with, for example, x1=Oct4,x2=Sox2, andex1=Myc.
changed from 15 to 3, overexpression time required about 5 times. The product of
overexpression value and time determines the reprogramming. The reprogramming ratio
increases (in a threshold-like manner) as the product increases beyond a critical value
103(Fig. 10). Indeed, this is natural, as the relaxation process of epigenetic fixation is
determined by the product.
The epigenetic fixation is introduced so that the genes that are not expressed are
harder to be expressed, following observations in cell-biology. Accordingly, the strength
of epigenetic fixation  ijhas to be larger than the value of ijchosen initially.
Therefore, epigenetic fixation threshold values  ijfor pluripotent genes were set to 1 :0
because the maximum value of initial threshold values ij(0) was 0:94. If it is set to a
lower value, the gene is not remained silenced due to the epigenetic change, even when
it is not expressed. On the other hand, if the epigenetic fixation threshold values  ijfor
differentiation regulators were also set to 1 :0, the reprogramming by overexpressing the
corresponding genes as well as external factors was not possible. In fact, we carried out
both differentiation and reprogramming simulations by choosing a variety of values of
ij, and confirmed that epigenetic fixation threshold values for pluripotent genes have
to be larger than that for differentiation regulators, to be consistent with experimental
observations.
In addition to overexpression levels and time span, the number of overexpressed
genes is important. Reprogramming did not occur by overexpression of a single gene,
even though its level and time span were sufficient to decrease the epigenetic variable:
two or more appropriate genes had to be overexpressed. If a single gene x1was
overexpressed over a sufficient period, the transition to a different fixed-point state
occurred, but gene expression did not regain oscillation. By starting from this cell with
this new fixed-point state, differentiation did not occur again even when the number of
cells was increased. These cells showed increased expression of pluripotent genes up to
the level of the original pluripotent cell, but they did not regain the capacity for
differentiation. Thus, decreasing the epigenetic threshold variable of pluripotent genes
was not sufficient for reprogramming.
We then conducted a reprogramming simulation by changing the initial values for
the epigenetic variable ij(0), that is,  ij. In general, as  ijbecame smaller, epigenetic
fixation became weaker, and the number of genes that had to be overexpressed
decreased. For example, if  34= 0:5 and  43= 0:3, the overexpression of just two
factors,x1andx2, without the external overexpression of any other genes could lead to
reprogramming (S4 Fig).
13/29Figure 9. Time series of gene expression in the reprogramming simulation,
with induction of pluripotent genes and external activation. Plotted here are
the time series of gene expression levels for x1,x2,x3,x4, and the epigenetic threshold
variables11(t) and13(t). Initially, all cells (e.g., 32 cells) were set at the differentiated
state (x1;2= 0;x3;4= 0:8), with the epigenetic fixation threshold values set at 1 :0 for
the pluripotent genes  31,  21, and  42, and at 0:78 for the differentiation regulators
13;34;43. The auto-regulator  11was set at 0 :50. We overexpressed genes x1and
x2for a long period ( Te100). The epigenetic variables in each cell changed gradually
because of the overexpression of these genes. In addition, the gene x4was promoted by
an external stimulus. After overexpression, gene expression began to oscillate again and
a few cells showed differentiation. Thus, cells were reprogrammed.
According to our results, pluripotent stem cells had an oscillatory gene expression
component; thus, the recovery of oscillation was necessary for recovery of pluripotency.
However, oscillation alone was not always sufficient for pluripotency. If the decrease in
the epigenetic threshold value was insufficient, the oscillation was weak and the
bifurcation to a differentiation fixed point could not occur by cell-cell interactions. In
this case, pluripotent genes were expressed. A cellular state such as this, with
expression of pluripotent genes but without differentiation potential, corresponds to the
pre-iPS state previously reported in reprogramming experiments [32,40].
The five-gene model
To promote expression of pluripotent genes, there is an auto-expression loop. This
auto-expression is mediated via positive feedback by mutual regulation of genes. In the
four-gene model, which has been described and studied thus far, this positive feedback
loop was introduced as the self-expression of x1. Auto-expression such as this may be
over-simplified, especially considering epigenetic modification as already mentioned. In
reality, the auto-expression feedback loop consists of a number of genes. Hence, we
replaced auto-regulation of x1in the four-gene model with a loop structure via a new
genex5(as shown in Fig. 1B), and attempted to validate our previous results and
examine the conditions necessary for reprogramming in comparison with experiments.
14/29Figure 10. Reprogramming efficiency against overexpression condition.
Plotted here are Reprogramming efficiency against the product of overexpression value
xe
1for the gene x1and its duration time Tesemi-log plot. We counted the number of
reprogrammed cells (that are differentiated after oscillation). The average
reprogramming ratio represents the percentage of reprogrammed cells per simulation.
There was a peak around the product xe
1Te103:1. If the product xe
1Tewas small
(xe
1Te<103), cells quickly returned to the differentiated fixed-point. Inversely, if it was
large (xe
1Te>103:3), cells fell into the pluripotent fixed-point, and did not show
differentiation.
First, we confirmed that the two fixed-points, FP and FD, and the oscillatory state,
O, existed in the five-gene model (see SI, S1 Text). Once confirmed, we also included
epigenetic threshold variables, as in the four-gene model. For example, we used two
epigenetic fixation parameters depending on the regulator type, i.e., the epigenetic
fixation value for the pluripotent regulators ( 15;31;21;51;42) was 1:0, and for
the differentiation regulators ( 13;34;43) it was 0:65. Additionally, we confirmed
that the switching from oscillatory state to FD progressed via cell-cell interactions (S6
Fig).
To regain pluripotency from the differentiated state, in our reprogramming
experiment with the five-gene model, overexpression of the genes x1,x2, andx5, as well
as one external factor (to inhibit gene x4), was necessary. These four genes correspond
to the Yamanaka factors ( Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 , and Myc) used for reprogramming (Fig. 11,
S7 Fig). As long as we started the reprogramming simulation after the threshold value
ij(t) for differentiated cells reached the pre-set level  ij, these four genes were
necessary for reprogramming.
The number of genes that had to be overexpressed depended on the level of
epigenetic fixation. In general, overexpression of the four aforementioned genes over a
sufficient period was required for reprogramming to reset the value of epigenetic
variables for the differentiated cells (epigenetic fixation was complete to have
ij(t)ij). In contrast, reprogramming was easier if epigenetic fixation was
insufficient, and fewer genes, including x5, were sufficient for reprogramming.
15/29Figure 11. Time series of gene expression in reprogramming via
overexpression of three genes and one external factor. Plotted here are time
series of gene expression for x1,x2,x3,x4,x5, and the epigenetic threshold variables
15. In this case, we used the following parameter set: 13(0) =34(0) =43(0) = 0:65,
15(0) =31(0) =21(0) =51(0) =42(0) = 1:0. In the differentiated state, we
overexpressed genes x1;x2, andx5over a long period and added one external regulator.
Induction of these factors changed the epigenetic threshold variables; gene expression
then began to oscillate again and, later, differentiation occurred in a few cells.
Discussion
In this study, we assessed a simplified model that was a part of an inferred GRN
previously reported by Dunn et al. [33]. Some regulations were simplified by deleting
mediator genes, but the core network that is believed to be important for pluripotency,
in particular the network motif for a toggle switch, was included. In accordance with
the reported GRN, the genes in the model corresponded to Nanog, Oct4, Gata6 , and
Gata4 , while the additional gene in our five-gene model corresponded to Klf4.
We showed that oscillation and switching between high and low levels of gene
expression causes some cells to fall into differentiated states via cell-cell interactions.
This interaction-induced differentiation from the oscillatory state was robust to noise.
Indeed, expression levels of the pluripotency-related gene Hes1 are reported to oscillate
in stem cells, but oscillation is apparently lost after differentiation [41]. This
observation is consistent with our oscillation-based mechanism.
Alternative proposals for the differentiation mechanism are based solely on
multistability and stochasticity. According to these views, both the differentiated and
pluripotent states are given by one of the multi-stable fixed-points, and cellular-state
transition is caused by noise. For example, a GRN with auto-promotion and mutual
inhibition between two genes [17] can produce such bistability. The noise level is critical
to this differentiation process. Unless noise level is optimally tuned, the transition
between the pluripotent and differentiated states continued to occur via noise, and
irreversible differentiation did not occur. Additionally, because switching is stochastic,
this model could not control the ratio of pluripotent to differentiated cells, and once a
16/29cell was in one of the bistable states, the epigenetic process fixed this state.
In contrast, differentiation from oscillatory dynamics and cell-cell interactions is
robust to noise. This provides an explanation for pluripotency as oscillatory dynamics,
and characterizes the irreversible differentiation as a transition from oscillatory to
fixed-point dynamics, which, later, is consolidated by epigenetic feedback.
In contrast to our findings, however, a recent study suggested that gene expression
in stem cells shows stochastic switching between high and low levels, rather than
oscillation dynamics [42]. We note that our mechanism works even with strong
stochasticity. Even though the strength of noise is set at a large value (say, = 1:0),
the differentiation by cell-cell interaction in our model works well. Besides the noise
during the expression dynamics, we have also studied the noise in the division process.
Indeed, even though the strength of noise in cell division is large (say d= 1:0), the
differentiation mechanism in our model still works well. Where this is the case, the
oscillatory component underlies gene expression that shows noisy dynamics. Hence, the
experimental observation did not contradict our oscillation scenario. Under such noise
level, the differentiation ratio from sibling is not necessarily correlated as in the
experimental results. Under these high noise levels for andd, and by setting the
parameter values say at div= 12:5 andD= 1:5, about 4 switching occurred per 100
cell division, as is consistent with the experimental data, while preserving the stochastic
oscillatory dynamics.
To check the possibility of stochastic oscillation experimentally, one would need to
examine whether an oscillatory component exists among noisy dynamics. This would be
possible by measuring the transition probability among three states (A, B, C) and
examining if the probability P(A!B) has a circulation component, as characterized
by the deviation between P(A!B)P(B!C)P(C!A) and
P(B!A)P(A!C)P(C!B). We also suggest that by measuring expression of
pluripotent genes for a number of iPS cells by single-cell-PCR, one could uncover the
loci of oscillatory attractor, as the phase of oscillation is expected to be scattered by
cells.
Second, in the experiment of [42] switching between Nanog-high to Nanog-low is less
frequent than the result presented here. However, this switching frequency can be easily
changed in our model by changing the parameter values div, the strength of cell-cell
interaction Dand noise.
Here, we also introduced epigenetic threshold variables to fix differentiated cellular
states via epigenetic changes. The epigenetic variables in our study promoted gene
expression if the regulator gene was highly expressed. Conversely, they inhibited gene
expression if the expression of the regulator was low. Indeed, epigenetic modification
represented by histone modification is known to reinforce gene function by
reconstruction of chromatin [43]. For example, the maintenance of pluripotency is
promoted and suppressed by open and closed chromatin states in cell differentiation,
respectively. The epigenetic feedback process in our model was a mathematical
representation of such reinforcement.
In our model, the time scale of epigenetic change epiwas much slower than the time
scale of gene expression dynamics, by a factor of 102 103. Therefore, because the time
scale for transcription is seconds to minutes, epigenetic modification appears to occur
over days. If the time scale for cell division is hours, the time scales for gene regulation
gene, cell division div, and epigenetic variable episatisfygene<div<epi. Indeed,
in our model, epigenetic fixation of cell differentiation works effectively given these
conditions.
If differentiation occurs, and the differentiation ratio depends on the time scale of
epigenetic modification, the rate of epigenetic change can control the distribution of cell
types. Hence, epigenetic fixation controls cell distribution and is, therefore, essential to
17/29the stabilization of cellular states.
However, epigenetic fixation also provides a barrier in reprogramming. In contrast to
the scenario without epigenetic fixation, simply resetting gene expression patterns is not
sufficient to reprogram differentiated cells. Even if the gene expression pattern of a
differentiated cell is reset to the pluripotent state, the cellular state quickly returns to a
differentiated state because of the change in the epigenetic threshold variables.
Reprogramming also requires overexpression of pluripotent genes over a time span of
epi. Even with overexpression of the correct genes, an insufficient amount of time
cannot relax the epigenetic threshold, and cells quickly return to the differentiated state.
Indeed, in reprogramming experiments, Yamanaka factors are overexpressed for days by
using retroviruses, during which time, it is suggested that chromatin is reconstructed.
In our model, the overexpression of multiple transcription factors, including
pluripotent genes, was generally necessary for reprogramming to occur. Indeed, in the
five-gene model, the four factors required for reprogramming were the Yamanaka
factors, Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 , and Myc, which are adopted in iPS construction. Even
though the GRN in our model contained only five genes, reprogramming required these
four factors. In particular, Klf4 was a prerequisite for reprogramming. In iPS
construction, Klf4 also plays an important role in promotion of reprogramming by
interacting with Oct4 andSox2 [44].
Note that the reprogramming efficiency in experiments is rather low. This might be
related with a limited range in the overexpression level in Fig. 10. However, at the
moment, it is uncertain if this low efficiency is due to difficulty in adjusting such range
of overexpression levels, or due to underlying noisy dynamics, or due to some other
experimental constraint.
Experimentally, reprogramming is reportedly easier if the epigenetic fixation of some
genes is weaker. Indeed, epigenetic fixation levels depend on the derived cell type or
chromatin structure [29,30]. Furthermore, highly efficient reprogramming, such as
deterministic (or non-stochastic) reprogramming from the privileged somatic cell
state [45,46], includes a chromatin remodeling factor or specific types of derived cell.
This scheme is expected to relax the level of epigenetic fixation for some genes. Thus, it
is consistent with the ease of reprogramming caused by reducing epigenetic fixation
parameters  ijfor some genes ( j) in our model.
Our study also demonstrates that cells fall into a fixed state with the expression of
pluripotent genes when there is insufficient overexpression to suppress differentiation
genes. Gene expression levels in such cells do not show oscillation, nor do cells show
differentiation again. Even though pluripotent genes are expressed, the potential for
differentiation is not regained. These cells are regarded as being in a pre-iPS state,
which was previously reported in reprogramming experiments [32,40]. In these
experiments, following overexpression of the Yamanaka factors, the cell did not regain
pluripotency even though ES cells-markers ( SSEA-1 andOct4 ) were expressed.
The GRNs we studied here are based on several experimental reports. In reality, the
GRNs responsible for pluripotency and differentiation involve many more components,
and other candidate GRNs have also been proposed for pluripotency [9]. Our
conclusions with regard to oscillation-based differentiation, epigenetic fixation, and
reprogramming, however, remain valid as long as the present core network is preserved.
Additionally, in a differentiation process including the core network structure consisting
ofNanog, Oct4, Gata6 , and Gata4 , as discussed here, the four factors are required for
reprogramming, independently of the parameter values, as is consistent with
experimental observations.
In summary, in our study, oscillatory gene expression produced the pluripotency of
cells, and differentiation occurred via a state transition to a fixed-point with the
suppression of pluripotent genes. These expression patterns were then fixed
18/29epigenetically. In our model, differentiation and reprogramming were interpreted as
creation (deletion) of gene expression oscillation and the enhancement or relaxation of
epigenetic fixation, respectively. Pluripotent states involved the oscillation of expression
of several (here, four to five) genes, while differentiated states suppressed the expression
of these genes to reduce oscillation. Thus, our results showed that reprogramming to
recover pluripotency involves recovery of gene expression, achieved by overexpression of
several genes, and relaxation of epigenetic fixation.
Models
Construction of GRN model
The simplified models consisted of either four or five genes with seven or eight
regulations, respectively. In simplification of GRN, we decreased nodes and edges as
long as the differentiation is possible. As a result, we extracted a four-factor model, as a
minimal structure showing differentiation. Furthermore, the reprogramming simulation
from this network, as presented in the present paper, is also consisted with experiments.
The existence of these regulations in the constructed GRN is supported by earlier
studies [9,47{50]. In the four-gene model, the self-activating gene (promotion-loop
structure) and its cofactor were regarded as pluripotent genes, and the genes inhibited
by these pluripotent genes were regarded as differentiation genes. For example, genes
x1,x2,x3, andx4corresponded with Nanog, Oct4, Gata6 , and Gata4 , respectively. In
the five-gene model, the additional gene was Klf4. Among these genes, only Gata4
functions in cell-cell signaling (interaction) according to Gene Ontology. Hence, we
considered cell-cell interactions through diffusive coupling by the gene product of x4.
We introduced epigenetic feedback regulation into the model as a change in the
threshold for gene expression. This depends on the expression levels of a regulator gene.
If the regulator gene is highly expressed, expression of the regulated gene is promoted;
however, where expression of the regulator gene is low, expression of the regulated gene
is inhibited. Epigenetic change occurs via the change in threshold for expression
dynamics and, with feedback, the cellular state is fixed.
Four-gene model
Here, we describe our gene expression dynamics model. Cellular states are represented
by the gene expression pattern of four genes, x1,x2,x3, andx4. These genes regulate
the expression levels of themselves and other genes. Additionally, we consider the
expression dynamics of gene iof thekth cell at time t, denoted as xk
i(t). Only gene x4
is involved in a cell-cell interaction, which is the diffusion of the gene expression level of
19/29x4. Hence, our differential equation model is as follows:
8
>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>><
>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>:_xk
1(t) =(xk
1(t)
K11)n
1+(xk
1(t)
K11)n1
1+(xk
3(t)
K13)n xk
1(t)
+k
1p
xk
1(t)
_xk
2(t) =(xk
1(t)
K21)n
1+(xk
1(t)
K21)n xk
2(t)
+k
2p
xk
2(t)
_xk
3(t) =1
1+(xk
1(t)
K31)n1
1+(xk
4(t)
K34)n xk
3(t)
+k
3p
xk
3(t)
_xk
4(t) =1
1+(xk
2(t)
K42)n(xk
3(t)
K43)n
1+(xk
3(t)
K43)n xk
4(t) +D
N(t)P
j(xj
4(t) xk
4(t))
+k
4p
xk
4(t)
whereDis the diffusion coefficient, k
iis an uncorrelated Gaussian white noise term
when the stochastic experiment is considered, and N(t) is the total number of cells at
timet. Depending on the parameter Kij, which gives the strength of activation or
inhibition from gene jtoi, the behavior of our model changes.
In cell division, two new cells are produced that have the same gene expression
pattern as the original cell. Additionally, gene expression is slightly perturbed by
adding a Gaussian white noise ( d= 1:010 3) after cell division, as ixior (1 i)xi
(withas a random number in [0 ;d] after each cell division.
Five-gene model
In the four-gene model, the positive feedback loop of the pluripotent gene x1is
introduced for self-activation. Auto-regulation such as this may be over-simplified; in
reality, this should be replaced by a feedback regulation loop including a number of
genes. Therefore, we change the auto-expression of gene x1in the four-gene model to a
loop structure via the gene x5, and the five-gene model is described as follows:
8
>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>><
>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>:_xk
1(t) =(xk
5(t)
K15)n
1+(xk
5(t)
K15)n1
1+(xk
3(t)
K13)n xk
1(t)
+k
1p
xk
1(t)
_xk
2(t) =(xk
1(t)
K21)n
1+(xk
1(t)
K21)n xk
2(t)
+k
2p
xk
2(t)
_xk
3(t) =1
1+(xk
1(t)
K31)n1
1+(xk
4(t)
K34)n xk
3(t)
+k
3p
xk
3(t)
_xk
4(t) =1
1+(xk
2(t)
K42)n(xk
3(t)
K43)n
1+(xk
3(t)
K43)n xk
4(t) +D
N(t)P
j(xj
4(t) xk
4(t))
+k
4p
xk
4(t)
_xk
5(t) =(xk
1(t)
K51)n
1+(xk
1(t)
K51)n xk
5(t)
+k
5p
xk
5(t)
Epigenetic feedback regulation
In the equation for xk
i(t), each parameter Kijis replaced by the epigenetic variable
ij(t), which changes over time depending on gene expression levels by introducing
20/29epigenetic feedback regulation as a change in the threshold for gene expression as
follows:
_ij(t) =1
epi(ij ij(t) xj(t));
where ijis the threshold value after epigenetic fixation and epiis the time scale of the
epigenetic variable. The value of the epigenetic variable ij(t) changes depending on the
expression levels of the regulator gene xj; if the regulator gene xjis highly expressed,
expression of the regulatee gene xiis promoted, but if expression of the regulator xjis
low, the regulatee xiis inhibited.
Model parameters
To numerically investigate our model, we set the Hill coefficient as n= 6 andn= 4 in
the in four-gene and five-gene models, respectively. The time of cell division tdivwas
chosen to be 25. The results of the model do not depend on these parameters, as long as
the former is sufficiently large (e.g., n6) and latter not too large (e.g., tdiv<1000).
The maximum number of cell divisions is 5; hence, the maximum number of cells is 32.
For most simulations, we used the parameters Kijas follows:
K13= 0:78;K34= 0:45;K31= 0:94;K11= 0:35;K21= 0:80;K42= 0:30, and
K43= 0:45. In the five-gene model, the additional regulations were K15= 0:14 and
K51= 0:80. The parameters for epigenetic feedback regulation andwere set to
2:0103and 0:1, respectively.
Model simulation
By using the code written by C/Python simulations were carried out by using standard
Runge-Kutta algorithm.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Tetsuhiro Hatakeyama, Benjamin Pfeuty, and Nen
Saito for useful discussions.
References
1. Evans MJ, Kaufman MH. Establishment in culture of pluripotential cells from
mouse embryos [Journal Article]. Nature. 1981;292(5819):154{6. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7242681 .
2.Martin GR. Isolation of a pluripotent cell line from early mouse embryos cultured
in medium conditioned by teratocarcinoma stem cells [Journal Article]. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 1981;78(12):7634{8. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6950406 .
3. Nichols J, Zevnik B, Anastassiadis K, Niwa H, Klewe-Nebenius D, Chambers I,
et al. Formation of pluripotent stem cells in the mammalian embryo depends on
the POU transcription factor Oct4 [Journal Article]. Cell. 1998;95(3):379{91.
Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9814708 .
4. Niwa H, Miyazaki J, Smith AG. Quantitative expression of Oct-3/4 defines
differentiation, dedifferentiation or self-renewal of ES cells [Journal Article]. Nat
Genet. 2000;24(4):372{6. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10742100 .
21/295. Chambers I, Colby D, Robertson M, Nichols J, Lee S, Tweedie S, et al.
Functional expression cloning of Nanog, a pluripotency sustaining factor in
embryonic stem cells [Journal Article]. Cell. 2003;113(5):643{55. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12787505 .
6.Mitsui K, Tokuzawa Y, Itoh H, Segawa K, Murakami M, Takahashi K, et al. The
homeoprotein Nanog is required for maintenance of pluripotency in mouse
epiblast and ES cells [Journal Article]. Cell. 2003;113(5):631{42. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12787504 .
7. GURDON JB. The developmental capacity of nuclei taken from intestinal
epithelium cells of feeding tadpoles [Journal Article]. J Embryol Exp Morphol.
1962;10:622{40. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/13951335 .
8. Takahashi K, Yamanaka S. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse
embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors [Journal Article]. Cell.
2006;126(4):663{76. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16904174 .
9. Boyer LA, Lee TI, Cole MF, Johnstone SE, Levine SS, Zucker JP, et al. Core
transcriptional regulatory circuitry in human embryonic stem cells [Journal
Article]. Cell. 2005;122(6):947{56. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16153702 .
10. Han JW, Yoon YS. Induced pluripotent stem cells: emerging techniques for
nuclear reprogramming [Journal Article]. Antioxid Redox Signal.
2011;15(7):1799{820. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21194386 .
11. Waddington CH. The Strategy of the Genes. London: George Allen & Unwin;
1957.
12. Mohammad HP, Baylin SB. Linking cell signaling and the epigenetic machinery
[Journal Article]. Nat Biotechnol. 2010;28(10):1033{8. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20944593 .
13. Yamanaka S. Elite and stochastic models for induced pluripotent stem cell
generation [Journal Article]. Nature. 2009;460(7251):49{52. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19571877 .
14. Graf T, Enver T. Forcing cells to change lineages [Journal Article]. Nature.
2009;462(7273):587{94. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19956253 .
15.Kauffman SA. Metabolic stability and epigenesis in randomly constructed genetic
nets [Journal Article]. J Theor Biol. 1969;22(3):437{67. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/5803332 .
16. Goodwin BC. Temporal Organizations in Cells. San Diego, USA: Academic
Press; 1963.
17. Andrecut M, Halley JD, Winkler DA, Huang S. A general model for binary cell
fate decision gene circuits with degeneracy: indeterminacy and switch behavior in
the absence of cooperativity [Journal Article]. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19358.
Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21625586 .
22/2918. Shu J, Wu C, Wu Y, Li Z, Shao S, Zhao W, et al. Induction of pluripotency in
mouse somatic cells with lineage specifiers [Journal Article]. Cell.
2013;153(5):963{75. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23706735 .
19. Wang J, Zhang K, Xu L, Wang E. Quantifying the Waddington landscape and
biological paths for development and differentiation [Journal Article]. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2011;108(20):8257{62. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21536909 .
20.Furusawa C, Kaneko K. Theory of Robustness of Irreversible Differentiation in a
Stem Cell System: Chaos Hypothesis [Journal Article]. J theor Biol.
2001;209:395{416.
21.Goto Y, Kaneko K. Minimal model for stem-cell differentiation [Journal Article].
Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys. 2013;88(3):032718. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24125305 .
22. Zou W, Senthilkumar DV, Duan J, Kurths J. Emergence of amplitude and
oscillation death in identical coupled oscillators [Journal Article]. Phys Rev E
Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys. 2014;90(3):032906. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25314503 .
23.Zou W, Senthilkumar DV, Koseska A, Kurths J. Generalizing the transition from
amplitude to oscillation death in coupled oscillators [Journal Article]. Phys Rev E
Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys. 2013;88(5):050901. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24329205 .
24. Kaneko K, Yomo T. Cell Division, Differentiation, and Dynamic Clustering
[Journal Article]. Physica D. 1994;75:89{102.
25. Kaneko K, Yomo T. Isologous diversification: a theory of cell differentiation
[Journal Article]. Bull Math Biol. 1997;59(1):139{96. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8980305 .
26. Suzuki N, Furusawa C, Kaneko K. Oscillatory protein expression dynamics
endows stem cells with robust differentiation potential [Journal Article]. PLoS
One. 2011;6(11):e27232. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22073296 .
27. Koseska A, Ullner E, Volkov E, Kurths J, Garciaa-Ojalvo J. Cooperative
differentiation through clustering in multicellular populations [Journal Article]. J
Theor Biol. 2010;263(2):189{202. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19932703 .
28.Ullner E, Zaikin A, Volkov EI, Garciaa-Ojalvo J. Multistability and clustering in
a population of synthetic genetic oscillators via phase-repulsive cell-to-cell
communication [Journal Article]. Physical Review Letters. 2007;99(14). Times
Cited: 82 Garcia-Ojalvo, Jordi/A-4574-2009; Ullner, Ekkehard/C-9331-2011
Garcia-Ojalvo, Jordi/0000-0002-3716-7520; 83. Available from:
<GotoISI>://WOS:000249974000079 .
29. Ernst J, Kheradpour P, Mikkelsen TS, Shoresh N, Ward LD, Epstein CB, et al.
Mapping and analysis of chromatin state dynamics in nine human cell types
[Journal Article]. Nature. 2011;473(7345):43{9. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21441907 .
23/2930.Marstrand TT, Storey JD. Identifying and mapping cell-type-specific chromatin
programming of gene expression [Journal Article]. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2014;111(6):E645{54. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24469817 .
31. Kim K, Doi A, Wen B, Ng K, Zhao R, Cahan P, et al. Epigenetic memory in
induced pluripotent stem cells [Journal Article]. Nature. 2010;467(7313):285{90.
Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20644535 .
32. Chen J, Liu H, Liu J, Qi J, Wei B, Yang J, et al. H3K9 methylation is a barrier
during somatic cell reprogramming into iPSCs [Journal Article]. Nat Genet.
2013;45(1):34{42. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23202127 .
33. Dunn SJ, Martello G, Yordanov B, Emmott S, Smith AG. Defining an essential
transcription factor program for na ve pluripotency [Journal Article]. Science.
2014;344(6188):1156{60. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24904165 .
34. Furusawa C, Kaneko K. Epigenetic feedback regulation accelerates adaptation
and evolution [Journal Article]. PLoS One. 2013;8(5):e61251. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23667436 .
35. Gombar S, MacCarthy T, Bergman A. Epigenetics decouples mutational from
environmental robustness. Did it also facilitate multicellularity? [Journal Article].
PLoS Comput Biol. 2014;10(3):e1003450. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24604070 .
36. Sasai M, Kawabata Y, Makishi K, Itoh K, Terada TP. Time scales in epigenetic
dynamics and phenotypic heterogeneity of embryonic stem cells [Journal Article].
PLoS Comput Biol. 2013;9(12):e1003380. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24348228 .
37.Sneppen K, Micheelsen MA, Dodd IB. Ultrasensitive gene regulation by positive
feedback loops in nucleosome modification [Journal Article]. Mol Syst Biol.
2008;4:182. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18414483 .
38.Dodd IB, Micheelsen MA, Sneppen K, Thon G. Theoretical analysis of epigenetic
cell memory by nucleosome modification [Journal Article]. Cell.
2007;129(4):813{22. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17512413 .
39. Niklas KJ, Bondos SE, Dunker AK, Newman SA. Rethinking gene regulatory
networks in light of alternative splicing, intrinsically disordered protein domains,
and post-translational modifications [Journal Article]. Front Cell Dev Biol.
2015;3:8. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25767796 .
40. Mattout A, Biran A, Meshorer E. Global epigenetic changes during somatic cell
reprogramming to iPS cells [Journal Article]. J Mol Cell Biol. 2011;3(6):341{50.
Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22044880 .
41. Imayoshi I, Isomura A, Harima Y, Kawaguchi K, Kori H, Miyachi H, et al.
Oscillatory control of factors determining multipotency and fate in mouse neural
progenitors [Journal Article]. Science. 2013;342(6163):1203{8. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24179156 .
24/2942.Singer ZS, Yong J, Tischler J, Hackett JA, Altinok A, Surani MA, et al. Dynamic
heterogeneity and DNA methylation in embryonic stem cells [Journal Article].
Mol Cell. 2014;55(2):319{31. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25038413 .
43.Gaspar-Maia A, Alajem A, Meshorer E, Ramalho-Santos M. Open chromatin in
pluripotency and reprogramming [Journal Article]. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
2011;12(1):36{47. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21179060 .
44. Wei Z, Yang Y, Zhang P, Andrianakos R, Hasegawa K, Lyu J, et al. Klf4
interacts directly with Oct4 and Sox2 to promote reprogramming [Journal
Article]. Stem Cells. 2009;27(12):2969{78. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19816951 .
45.Rais Y, Zviran A, Geula S, Gafni O, Chomsky E, Viukov S, et al. Deterministic
direct reprogramming of somatic cells to pluripotency [Journal Article]. Nature.
2013;502(7469):65{70. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24048479 .
46. Guo S, Zi X, Schulz VP, Cheng J, Zhong M, Koochaki SH, et al. Nonstochastic
reprogramming from a privileged somatic cell state [Journal Article]. Cell.
2014;156(4):649{62. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24486105 .
47.Charron F, Paradis P, Bronchain O, Nemer G, Nemer M. Cooperative interaction
between GATA-4 and GATA-6 regulates myocardial gene expression [Journal
Article]. Mol Cell Biol. 1999;19(6):4355{65. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10330176 .
48. Chazaud C, Yamanaka Y, Pawson T, Rossant J. Early lineage segregation
between epiblast and primitive endoderm in mouse blastocysts through the
Grb2-MAPK pathway [Journal Article]. Dev Cell. 2006;10(5):615{24. Available
from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16678776 .
49.Pikkarainen S, Tokola H, Kerkel a R, Ruskoaho H. GATA transcription factors in
the developing and adult heart [Journal Article]. Cardiovasc Res.
2004;63(2):196{207. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15249177 .
50. Li C, Wang J. Quantifying Waddington landscapes and paths of non-adiabatic
cell fate decisions for differentiation, reprogramming and transdifferentiation
[Journal Article]. J R Soc Interface. 2013;10(89):20130787. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24132204 .
Supporting Information
S1 Text
Supplementary information about the five-gene model.
Similar to the four-gene model, depending on the dominance between the positive
and negative feedback of gene x1, the five-gene model showed three behaviors: (i)
fixed-point attractor with high expression of pluripotent genes (FP), (ii) fixed-point
attractor with high expression of differentiation genes (FD), and (iii) the oscillatory
state (O). The five-gene model also showed differentiation from the oscillatory state
25/29(Fig. S4). The attractor depended on the parameters Kijfor each edge, while most
effective regulations to determine the type of attractors were related to gene x1, as in
the four-gene model. In the five-gene model, the expression level of gene x5was
important because the key gene x1is promoted via x5.
Where oscillatory gene expression was observed, the gene expression levels in each
cell were desynchronized with cell division, and the epigenetic threshold variables took
different values according to cells. With the change in epigenetic variables, oscillation
was attenuated or terminated for some cells, leading to differentiation.
S1 Fig
S1 Fig. Effects of the value of the diffusion coefficient D.The
differentiation ratio and time is plotted against the diffusion coefficient D. The
simulation in the four-gene model was conducted with cell-cell interactions, and with an
increase in cell numbers. From 1000 samples, we counted the number of differentiated
cells (x10) for each diffusion coefficient D. A: The average of the differentiation ratio
(vertical axis) was computed as the percentage of differentiated cells per simulation.
Starting from a pluripotent state, the number of cells that went to a fixed point x10
increased with the diffusion coefficient D. B: The average time needed for cells to
differentiate was computed and plotted as a function of D. The time to differentiation
increased with the diffusion coefficient D.
S2 Fig
S2 Fig. Cellular state transition under highly noise. Time series of gene
expression levels for x1(as in Fig. 5). Similar conditions to those described in Fig. 4
were adopted, except that a Gaussian noise term with the amplitude = 1:0 was
included. Expression levels of cells are plotted according to color. Gene expression
oscillation was irregular because of the noise. Irreversible transition from the oscillatory
pluripotent to the differentiated state ( x10) occurred for = 0:1.
26/29S3 Fig
S3 Fig. Phase diagram of differentiation behavior plotted against time
scaleepi(vertical axis) and (horizontal axis). Parameters were set as in Fig.
6. Brown, orange, green, and blue indicate fixed points at x1= 0 without
differentiation, differentiation and loss of oscillation, preservation of oscillation, and the
fixed-point of the differentiated state ( x10) (FD), respectively. For low values of epi,
the epigenetic fixation progressed quickly, and then cells reached the fixed-point with
expressed pluripotent genes (FP). Differentiation from the oscillatory state appeared at
a high value of epi.
S4 Fig
S4 Fig. Time series of gene expression in the reprogramming simulation
27/29by inducing two factors. Specifically, time series of gene expression for x1;x2;x3;x4,
and the epigenetic variables 11and13are shown. The initial condition was as follows:
all cells were in the differentiated state, where the epigenetic threshold values were set
at 1:0 for the pluripotent genes  31;21, and  42, and lowered for the differentiation
regulators to  13= 0:78,  34= 0:5,  43= 0:3. The value of the auto-regulator  11was
set at 0:50. In differentiated cells, genes x1andx2were overexpressed for a long period.
The epigenetic threshold ijdecreased with the overexpression of these genes, and the
gene expression restarted oscillation. Later, a few cells differentiated again; thus, cells
were reprogrammed.
S5 Fig
S5 Fig. Time series of gene expression in the five-gene model. Time series
of gene expression levels for x1,x2,x3,x4, andx5. Expression levels of cells are plotted
according to color, but most colors are overlaid and, therefore, difficult to discern. Here,
the following parameter set was used:
K13= 0:80;K34= 0:45;K43= 0:45;K15= 0:14K31= 0:94;K21= 0:81;K51= 0:81, and
K42= 0:30. Gene expression levels initially showed oscillation, and then they were
desynchronized. Ultimately, this model showed differentiation, as observed in the
four-gene model.
28/29S6 Fig
S6 Fig. Time series of gene expression in the five-gene model with the
epigenetic parameter. Time series of gene expression levels for x1,x2,x3,x4,x5,
and the epigenetic threshold variables 15(t). Here, we used parameters of  ijas
follows:  13=  34=  43= 0:65;15=  31=  21=  51=  42= 1:0. Initially, gene
expression oscillated and gradually desynchronized with cell division. Ultimately, cells
fell into a fixed point x11 orx10 because of epigenetic fixation.
S7 Fig
S7 Fig. The gene regulatory network in the reprogramming simulation
with the five-gene model. The GRN for reprogramming in the five-gene model and
an external factor for reprogramming. Arrow headed and T-headed lines represent
positive and negative regulation, respectively. The pluripotent genes x1,x2, andx5
were overexpressed, and the external stimulus ex1 was added to inhibit x3. Cells were
reprogrammed by the induction of these factors, by which cells restarted oscillation.
These inducing factors corresponded to the Yamanaka factors ( Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 , and
Myc).
29/29