Title: Potential of longevity: hidden in structural complexity
Abstract:   In order to understand the phenomenon of longevity in biological world, the
relationship between the potential of longevity and the structural complexity
of an organism is analyzed. I. The potential of longevity is the maximum
lifespan of an organism if it lives in an ideal environment. The longevity of
an organism includes two parts: the time for development (development time) and
the time for structure-maintenance (maintenance time). II. The development time
of an organism depends on its structural complexity. The maintenance time is
related to two factors: the degree of damage-exposure and the potential of
functionality for structure-maintenance. The potential of functionality is
built in structural complexity. Since both of development time and maintenance
time are determined by structural complexity, the potential of longevity of an
organism is hidden in structural complexity. III. The individuals of different
species have different potentials of longevity because they have different
structural complexities. An animal has limited longevity because it has limited
structural complexity. Limited structural complexity and limited longevity are
essential for the survival of a species. IV. Despite having the same potential
of longevity, the individuals of a species can have different lifespans. The
lifespan of an individual is more related to the degree of damage-exposure,
which is determined by the living environment and the living habit of the
individual. In conclusion, the potential of longevity of an organism is hidden
in structural complexity, but the real lifespan of an organism is more related
to the living environment.

Full Text: *email  : thomasjicun@gmail.com   1 
  Potential of longevity : hidden  in structural complexity  
Jicun Wang -Michelitsch1*, Thomas M Michelitsch2  
1Department of Medicine, Addenbrooke's Hospital, University Cambridge, UK (work address until 2007) 
2Institut Jean le Rond d’Alembert (Paris 6), CNRS UMR 7190 Paris, France  
Abstract   
In order t o understand  the phenomenon  of longe vity in biological world, the relationship 
between the potential of longevity and the  structural complexity of an organism is analyzed . I. 
The p otential of longevity is the maxi mum lifespan  of an organism  if it lives in an “ideal ” 
environment. The l ongevity of an organism includes two parts: the time for development  
(development time ) and the time for structure -maintenance  (maintenance time ). II. The 
development time  of an organi sm depends on its structural complexity . The maintenance time  
is related to two factors:  the degree of damage -exposure and the potential of functionality  for 
structure -maintenance . The p otential of functionality include s also two parts: the capacity of 
basic functionality and the potential of functional compensation . The capacity of b asic 
functionality is built in  the structural complexity  of an organism.  For an organism,  the 
structural complexity  and the functionality will be reduced gradually  with age  by 
accumulation of Misrepairs. However, f unctional compensation can slow down the decline of 
functionality with aging . There are t wo major mechanisms for  functional compensation : 
network -like organization of  sub-structures  and regeneration  of sub -structures . These  two 
mechanisms are also built in the structure of an organism . Since  the development time  and the 
maintenance time  are both determined by structural complexity, t he potential of longevity  of 
an organism  is hidden  in structural complexity . III. The in dividuals of d ifferent species’ have 
different longevities because they have different structural complexities. An animal has 
limited  longevity because it has  limited structural complexity.  Limited structural complexity 
and l imited longevity are essential for the survival of a species . IV. Despite having  the same 
potential of longevity, the individuals of a species can have  different lifespans. T he lifespan of 
an individual is more related to the degree of damage -exposure, which is determined by the 
living circumstance  and the living habits  of the  individual .  In conclusion,  the potential of 
longevity of an organism is hidden in structural complexity, but the real lifespan  of an  
organism  is more related to  the living environment.  
Keywords   
Longevity,  lifespan, potential of longevity , structural complexity , development, structure -
maintenance, potential of functionality,  functional compensation,  accumulation of Misrepairs , 
aging,  limited structural complexity, limited longevity, repeated developments , redirected 
development,  individual lifespan , and living environment  
 
 *email  : thomasjicun@gmail.com   2 
 To have a long  lifespan  is a dream  for all of us. However, to  realize  this dream , we need to 
know at first what factor s determine  our longevity  and why we all have a limited longevity. 
Some research  groups are searching for “lifespan -related genes”  for uncovering the secret of 
longevity . However , lifespan -related genes are not necessarily lifespan -determined . Aging is 
related to longevity; however a concrete link between aging and  longevity is missin g. For 
interpreting  aging, we have proposed a novel theory:  Misrepair -accumulation theory (Wang, 
2009 ).  The m ain idea  of this theory is : aging of a multi -cellular organism  is a result of 
accumulation of Misrepair s on tissue level. This theory is helpful not only for understanding 
aging but also for understanding  longevity. In the present paper , we discuss the relationship 
between the longevity and the structural complexity of an organism by Misrepair  mechanism . 
We aim to show by our discussion that the pot ential of longevity of an organism is determined 
by its structural complexity.  Our discussion tackles the following issues :  
 
I. Concept s of longevity  
II. The p otential of longevity  of an organism  is hidden in structural complexity  
2.1   Concept of structural comple xity of an organism  
2.1.1 Determining factors for the structural  complexity  of an organism   
2.1.2 The time for  developme nt of an organism  is determined by the degree of structural  
complexity  
2.2   Gradual reduction of structural complexity of an organism with aging : by accumulation of 
Misrepairs  
2.3   The potential of  functionality of an organism for structure -maintenance  is built in structural 
complexity  
2.3.1 Basic functionality : related to  the size of an organism   
2.3.2 Functional compensation by network -like organization of sub -structures  
2.3.3 Functional compensation by regeneration of sub -structures  
2.4   The p otential of longevity  of an organism  is determined by structural complexity  
2.5   Limited potential of longevity  of an animal  is a result of limited structural complexity  
2.6   The long  longev ity of a queen ant is obtained by redirected development   
2.7   The long  longevity of a tree is obtained by re peated developments  
III. Individual  lifespans: more related to  living environments and  living habits  
IV. Conclusions  
 
I. Concept s of longevity  
The t erm of “longevity ” refers  to the life expectancy of a n organism, namely the length of  
time that an organism is expected to exist  as a whole structure. I t includes two parts: the time 
for develop ment of the organism and the remaining time used for maintaining the struc ture of 
the organism till breakdown (death) of the  structure. Before discussing longevity, several 
concepts  related to longevity need to  be cl early defined and distinguished. These concepts *email  : thomasjicun@gmail.com   3 
 include  lifespan, average longevity, and potential of longevity. “Longevity ” is a statistical 
prediction of  life-length, and it is strictly speaking different from the actua l life -length of an 
organism , which is called  “lifespan”. The l ongevity of a group of individuals  of a species  is 
often predicted by the average life -length  of individuals, which is called average longevity . 
The individuals  that are of  the same  species but  live in different geographic areas can have 
quite different average longevities .  
However, w hen we compare  the longevities of different species ’, we are actually studying  
their maximum longevities.  The maximum longevity of individuals of a species  is in fact the 
“potential  of longevity ” of an individual . The p otential of longevity  is the life expectancy of 
an organism when  it lives in an “ideal” envir onment . “Ideal” environment maybe does not 
exist in nature; however an environment where  an organism  can obtain sufficient  food and be  
exposed to the least damage  is regarded as an “ideal” environment. In this paper, three 
longevity -related concepts have their definitions as follows:  
 Lifespan: the actual life -length of an organism  
 Average longevity: the average life expectancy of a group of individuals living in similar 
environments  
 Potential of longevity: the maximum life expectancy of individuals of a s pecies living in an 
ideal environment  
 
II. The p otential of longevity  of an organism  is hidden in structural complexity  
Two factors are related to  the potent ial of longevity of an organism : the complexity of its 
struc ture and the potential of its functionality . The complexity of structure determines the 
time for  development of the organism.  The potential of functionality  determines the time for 
structure -maintenance  till death of the organism. It is known that the functionality  of a system  
is determined by  the structure  of the system. Thus,  the potential  of functionality of an 
organism should  lie in the complexity of  the structure  of the organism . In this part , we discuss 
how the functionality and the  potential of  longevity of an organism  are determined by the 
complexity of  structure.  
2.1    Concept of structural complexity  of an organism  
In physics, “complexity ” is a term used for describing  the relationship  between the whole 
system  and its sub-systems in  a complex system such as a  living being . A complex system  
manifests its c omplexity on several aspects , including  emergence, f eedback effect , self -
organization , and adaptation  (Haken , 1990;  Wunderlin, 1992 ). Emergence  is the phenomenon 
that the behavior of a system cannot be tracked back to the behavior s of its sub -systems.  For 
example, a heart has the ability of  pump ing blood, but a singular  cardiac  muscular  cell, as  part 
of heart  wall, does not have this ability. Feedback effect  is the phenomenon that  the sub-
systems can make responses to changes of the whole  syste m, and wise -verse. For example, 
cardiac  muscular cells are the functional components of  a heart; however failure of  heart 
caused  by arterial hypertension may result in  death  of cardiac  cells. Self-organization  is the 
phenomenon that  a system  can develop it s structure  automatically by organizing its sub -*email  : thomasjicun@gmail.com   4 
 systems  given  sufficient energy and substance s. Development of embryo  is an example of 
self-organization. Adaptation  is the phenomenon  that the sub-systems can make  suitable 
response s to changes of  environmen t for preventing death  of the whole system . For example, 
overloading of  heart by hypertension will induce  enlargement of cardiac  cells, which can 
make functional compensation  for the heart .  
All of t hese phenomena  show  the complex  functional  relationship s between the whole  system 
and its sub -system s. However,  all of these functional relationship s are built in the or ganization  
of sub -systems , namely  the special spatial relationship of sub -systems . For a s ystem or an 
organism,  functional  complexity i s built i n structural  complexity . Therefo re, for  
understand ing the potential of functionality  of a system , it is essential to study the structural 
complexity  of the system . In this paper, structural  complexity  is defined as  the complex ity 
of organization of  the sub-systems ( or sub-structures) of a system ( or an organism ).  
2.1.1   Determining factors for the structural  complexity  of an organism   
The degree  of structural complexity  of an organism  is related to several factors.  Firstly, it is in 
ratio to the total num ber of sub -structures, including the number of hierarch ical levels of sub-
structure s, the number of types of sub -structures, and the amount  of sub -structure s of each 
type. For example, molecules, cells , tissues , and organs  are the four levels of sub -struct ures of 
a multi -cellular organism.  In a tissue, there are different types of  cells and extracellular 
matrixes  (ECMs).  The s tructural complexity of a tissue will increase with the increase of 
diversity  of cells/ECMs and the increase of total amounts of cells/ECMs.  Secondly, the 
manner of organization (distribution)  of sub -structures  also contributes to the structural 
complexity  of an organism . An organization will have a higher complexity if it permits  each 
sub-structure  to communicate with more  other sub -structures . As shown in Figure 1 , given the 
same total number of sub -structure s, organization C has higher complexity than organization 
A and organization B. In organization C, each sub -structure (such as sub -structure Z) can 
communicate with six other sub-structures , whereas in  organization  A (or organization B), 
each sub -structure can communicate only with three ( or four) other sub -structures.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 . Different  structural  complexities in different manners of organization s of sub -structure s  Organization C 
 Z 
Sub-structures  
 Organization B 
  
Z Organization A  
 
Z  Z *email  : thomasjicun@gmail.com   5 
 An organization will have  higher complexity when it permits  each sub -structure to  communicate with more 
other sub -structures. For example, organization C has higher complexity than organization  A and organization B. 
In organization C, each sub -struct ure (such  as sub-structure Z) can communicate with six other sub -structures.  
In organization  A (or organization B), each  sub-structure can communicate only with three (or four) other sub -
structures.  
 
The m ultiple communicating pathways between sub -structures compo se a communicating 
network . For example, t he lobules of liver have a network -like organization (Figure 2 ). In a 
liver, every  lobule has six branches of portal veins, and three neighbor lobules share a branch 
of portal vein.  By such an organization, each lo bule functions as a common pathway for six 
branches of  portal veins to “be linked to” a central vein;  and each portal vein has three 
pathways to “communicate” with central veins (via three lobules ). The organization of lobules  
in this way  reduce s the risk of failure of liver when some lobules or portal veins fail. Thus, 
network -like organization of cells/tissues  is an effective way to make  functional compensation  
for a n organ. The degree of complexity of a network is related to  two factors: the number of 
sub-structures (points) and the number of communicating pathways of each sub-structure with 
other sub -structures . For example, the degree of complexity of the neuron network in brain is 
related to the number of neuron s and the nu mber of dendrites of each neu ron. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 . Network -like organization of lobules in liver  
In a liver, the lobules are in a network -like organization. Every  lobule has six branches of portal veins, and three 
neighbor lobules share a branch of portal vein. By such an organiza tion, each lobule functions  as a common 
pathway for six branches of portal veins  to be connected to a central vein,  and each portal vein has three 
pathways to “communicate” with central veins (via three lobules ). The n etwork -like organization of lobules  is 
an effective way to reduce the risk of failure of  liver when some lobules or  portal veins fail.  
  Liver lobule  
Hepatic artery  Bile duct   
Central vein   Portal vein   *email  : thomasjicun@gmail.com   6 
 In summary, the degree of structural complexity of an organism is not only related to  the 
numb er of levels of sub -structures and the diversity/ amount of sub -structures, but also related 
to the num ber of communicating pathways between  sub-structure s (Box 1 ). The total number 
of sub -structures may be the main determining factor for  the size of an organism  (or organ) . 
However, the degree of complexity of communic ating network of sub -structures is not 
necessarily related to the size of an organism  (or organ) . Therefore, the degree of structural 
complexity is partially related to the size of an organism. For example, a rat h as a bigger body 
than a mouse,  thus the st ructural complexity of a rat is higher than that of  a mouse.  However, 
when we compare the brain of a human being with that of a cow, the result  is not obvious . A 
human  brain is smaller than a cow  brain , but the network of neurons in human brain is more 
complex than  that of a cow. Therefore, a human brain has higher structural complexity than a 
cow brain.   
 
Box 1 .  Determining factors for the structural complexity of an organism  
 
 
 
 
2.1.2  The t ime for development  of an organism  is determined by  the degree of structural  
complexity  
Development of an organism is a process of construction  of a structure and its complexity. A 
more complex organism needs  a longer time for development . The a nimals of different 
species’ have different sizes of organs ; therefore  they have different degrees of struct ural 
complexity  and need different  lengths of time for development. However , the period of 
development of an organ ism cannot be too long. If it is too long, the organism could die  
before being fully developed. I n nature , full development of an organism is only possible 
when the rate of construction  is higher than that of destruction  by damage . An embryo  needs 
to develop in a protected environment, since the high structural complexity of an animal 
embryo cannot be built up successfully in a damaging  natural  environment. Natural  pressure 
restricts the increase of stru ctural complexity of  creature s. An animal has limited structural 
complexity because it has limited body development.  Different  species ’ of animal s have  
different  limit s on structural complexity , and the limits are determined by their gene 
configuration s. Differently, some plants including most species’  of trees undergo repe ated 
developments  after reproduction  age.  The repeated developments  increase continuously the 
structural complexities  of a tree . Some trees seem  to have no genetic limit on  structural 
complexity ; however their development s will be stopped by a catastrophe in  nature .  
2.2    Gradual r eduction  of structural complexity of an organism with aging : by 
accumulation of Misrepairs   The n umber of levels of sub -structures  
 The d iversity and amount of sub -structures  at each level  
 The n umber of communicating pathways between sub -structu res  *email  : thomasjicun@gmail.com   7 
 An organism is able to maintain its  structure by exerting functions  on many  aspects. The 
potential of functionality of an organism is built in its structure, which is normally fully 
developed. An organ ism goes to failure on function ality in two ways. O ne is  rapid, directly by 
a severe  injury , which destroys the structural integrity  of an  organism . Rapid death is an 
accidental death. The other is  gradual , through a process of aging  (Figure 3 ). In our view, 
aging of an organism  is a re sult o f accumulation of Misrepairs  of its structure  (Wang, 2009 ). 
Misrepair is a strategy of repair  of an injured living structure by  altered material s and in 
altered remodeling.  In situation  of a severe injury , when full repair is impossible to achieve,  
Misrepair  is a way to maintain  the structural integrity  and prevent death of an organism . 
Misrepair s are unavoidable for an individual to survive till the age of reproduction. T herefore , 
Misrepair mechanism is essential  for the survival  of a species .  
Howev er, Misrepair results in  structure -alteration and function -reduct ion of a living structure . 
Scar formation is a kind of Misrepair  essential for healing of a deep wound. However,  a skin 
scar alters  the structure/function of  the local par t of skin. Misrepair s are irrevers ible and 
irremovable , thus  they can accumulat e with time , appearing as aging of a structure . 
Accumulation of Misrepairs results in a gradual reduction of structural complexity an d 
functionality of an organism , till death of the organism by fa ilure of functions . Therefore, 
aging  is a result of long-term struggling of an organism with  damaging environment. The 
more destructive the environment  is, the more rapid will an organism lose  its structural 
complexity and functionality.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Gradual reduction of structural complexity of an organism with ag ing 
An organism goes to failu re on functionality in two ways. O ne is rapid, directly by a severe injury, which 
destroys the structura l integrity of an  organism. Rapid death is an accidental  death.  The other is gradual, 
through a process of aging. In our view, aging of an organism is a result of accumulation of Misrepairs of its 
structure . Misrepair results in irreversible structure -alteration  and function -reduction of a living structure . Thus, 
accumulation of Misrepairs leads to  gradual  reduction  of structural complexity  of an organism  with age , till 
death of the organism by failure of functions .  
 t 
Structual complexity  Slow aging  
Accidental death  Body d evelopment  *email  : thomasjicun@gmail.com   8 
 2.3 The potential of  functionality of an organism  for structure -maintenance  is built in  
structu ral complexity  
An organ ism can  exert many functions to maintain  its structure. The potential of functionality 
of an organism  include s two parts: the capacity of basic functionality  and the potential of 
functional compensation . The capacity of b asic functio nality  is related  to the total number of 
sub-structures , thus it is built in the structural complexity  of an  organism . Functional 
compensation refers to  the capability of an organism on making  up part of lost functionality 
when a sub-struc ture is dead. Functional compensation can slow down the decline of 
funct ionality of an organism with aging . There are at least t wo mechanisms  for functional  
compensation: network -like organization of sub -structures and regeneration of sub -structures . 
The p otential  of funct ional compensation by these two mechanisms  are also built in the 
structural complexity  of an organism .  
2.3.1  Basic functionality: related to the size of an organism  
The b asic functionality  of an organism  (or organ)  can be  approximately evaluated by the s ize 
of the organism  (or organ) . The size of an organism is in ratio to the total number of sub-
structures . For example, the digesting capacity of a stomach is determined by the number of 
cells and glands  in stomach mucosa. The sizes of the same type of org ans are different in the 
animals of different species. Thus the hearts/livers in different species of animals have 
different functional potentials. For example, the heart of a rat has  higher  functional potential 
than that of a mouse, because the former  is bigger and the heart wall of a rat is thicker than 
that of a mouse. However, for all animals, the b asic f unctionality  will be reduced with aging  
by accumulation of Misrepairs and gradual loss of functional unites.  After  age 60, the 
functionality of a human  brain , including  the ability  of memor izing , decreases  gradually . The 
reason for that is: an old people will have  less and less  number of functional neurons in brain  
with aging .  For the same person, the  brain is smaller at age 80 than that at  age 30.  
Accumulation of Misrepairs reduces the number of  functional sub-structures of an organism  
with aging . Nevertheless , a bigger organism has often bigger organs, thus it needs  more time 
and more number of Misrepairs than a sma ller one for going to failure  on func tions . 
2.3.2  Functional compensation by network -like organization of sub -structures   
A network -like organization of sub -structures permits  functional substitution  of sub -structures . 
The lobules of liver are in a network -like organization.  In a network , the communications 
between two sub -structures  (points)  have more than one pathway , and  each sub -structure  
(point)  functions as a crossing point for  several  communicating pathway s between other sub -
structures.  When there are  multiple  pathways between two points (point A and point B) by 
“other points  (such as point C or point D) ”, these pathways can substitute to each other . 
Namely, point C and point D can substitute  each other on mediating the communications 
between  point A and point B . Even if  point  C fails, point D can maintain the functionality of 
the whole network . For example, in a network  like that in Figure 4A, sub-structure  X2 can 
communicate with sub-structure  Z2 via two pathways : Y1 and Y2. Y1 can communicate with 
Y2 via pathway X2 and pathway Z2. The  pathway between X2 and Z1 and the pathway 
between X1 and Z2 cross at Y1. In mediating the communication s between X2 and Z2, Y1 *email  : thomasjicun@gmail.com   9 
 can function  as a substitution  for Y2. When Y1 fails, the function  of Y1 can be substituted  by 
Y2; and the communicating efficie ncy between X2 and Z2 will not be severely affected .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
   
 
Figure 4.   Function al compensation of an organism by  network -like organization  of sub -structures  
A. Communicating n etwork  between sub -structures   In the organization composed by  sub-structures  X1, 
X2..., Y1, Y2 ..., and Z1, Z2 ..., sub -structure X2 can communicate with sub -structure Z2 via two pathways: Y1 
and Y2. Y1 can communicate with Y2 via pathway X2 and pathway Z2. The pathway between X2 and Z1 
and the pathway between  X1 and Z2 cross  at Y1. These pathways between different sub -structures cross 
with  each other and compose  a network. In mediating the communication s between X2 and Z2, Y1 can 
function as a substitution for  Y2. When  Y1 fails, the  function  of Y1 can be substituted by Y2; and the 
communicating efficiency between X2 and Z2 will not be severely affected.  
B. Network -like distribution  of vein s in a plant  leaf   In the leaf, vein R1 crosses w ith vein T1 at point S1. This 
means that the part of  leaf at point S 1 has two sources of wat er supply: vein R1 and vein T1. For the water 
supply of point S1, vein T1 can substitute vein R1. Similarly, the part s of leaf  at points S2, S3, and S4 have 
all two sources of water supply , namely  vein T and vein R . The network -like distribution  of branche s of 
veins  reduces the risk of death of a leaf from failure  of a branch of vein .  Vein   R 
Vein   T T1 
T3 T4 T2 R1 R3 R4 R2 
S1 S3 S4 S2 B X1 X3 X4 X5 X2 
Y1 Y3 Y4 Y5 Y2 
Z1 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z2 A *email  : thomasjicun@gmail.com   10 
 The distribution of small blood vessels in an organ is also in a network, because some 
branches of vessels cross to each other. This network is similar to that of veins in a plant leaf . 
In the  leaf in Figure 4B , vein R1 crosses vein T1 at point S1. This means that  the part of 
tissue at point S1 has two sources of water supply: vein R1 and vein T1. For the water supply 
to S1, vein T1 can substitute vein R1. Similarly, the parts  of tissue at points  S2, S3,  and S4 
have all two sources of water supply: vein T and vein R. A network -like distribution of 
branches of blood vessels reduces the risk of death of an organ from blockage of a branch of 
blood vessel. The potential of function al compensation by network -like organization of sub -
structures is related to the degree of complexity of network , thus it is  determined by the  
structural complexity of an organism.  
2.3.3   Functional compensation by regeneration of sub -structures  
A living o rganism has the ability to reproduce  sub-structures  for maintaining its structure and 
functionality. These sub -structures include cells, proteins, lipids, and small molecules. For a 
multi -cellular organism, reproduction of cells is essential  for the repair /maintenance  of the 
organism . Except in hematopoietic tissue and epithelial tissue, r egeneration of cells is often 
induced by  death of cells,  and new cells are used for replacing the dead ones. Regeneration  of 
cells has two roles  for an organ : to maintain the structural integrity  and to compensat e the  lost 
function ality due to  loss of cells . A tissue may have reduced functionality when some cells die. 
By making up structural complexity, r egeneration of cells can compensate the function ality of 
a tissue , com pletely  by full repair or partially by Misrepair ( Figure 5). Misrepair of a tissue is 
often achieved  by regeneration  of cells . However, in a Misrepair, the reproduced cells are in 
an altered reorganization . Thus the cell regeneration in Misrepair can only partial ly 
compensate the lost functionality  of a tissue  (Figure 5). Regeneration  of cells  can slow down 
the gradual r eduction of function ality of an organism  with aging . The potential of functional 
compensation by cell-regeneration is related to  the number  of stem cells, thus it is built in the 
structur al complexity  of an organism.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 . Functional compensation by regeneration  of cells  in full repair and in Misrepair   
Regeneration of cells in a tissue is often induced by death of cells, and ne w cells are used for replacing the dead 
ones. F ull repair  of a tissue is often accomplished by  regeneration  of cells . In full repair, the structural Death of cells  Regeneration of cells  Full repair  
Misrepair  Full functional compensation  
Partial functional compensation  *email  : thomasjicun@gmail.com   11 
 complexity and the functionality  of a tissue  is completely restored by regenerated cells (full repair ). Mis repair 
can be also achieved  by regeneration  of cells ; however the reproduced cells in Misrepair are in an altered 
reorganization.  Thus the cell regeneration in Misrepair  can only partially comp ensate the lost functionality  of a 
tissue  (Misrepair ). 
 
Taken t ogether, the potential of functional compensation by network -like organization of sub -
structures and that by regeneration of sub -structures are both built in the structural complexity 
of an organism. Small creatures such as worms have often short longevity , because they have 
low structural complexity. With low structural complexity, small animals have low basic 
functionality and low potential of functional compensation for structure -maintenance.  
Normally, b asic functionality  is related to the size of an org anism, but the potential of 
functional  compensation is not necessarily related. Therefore, the total potential of 
functionality is not completely determined by the size of an organism.  For example, the 
potential of functionality of the brain of an animal c annot be judged by the size of brain.  A 
cow has a much bigger brain that a mouse; however a cow is not many times “cleverer” than a 
mouse. In summary, the potential of functionality of an organism for structure -maintenance is 
built in the structural compl exity  of the organism . 
2.4  The p otential of longevity  of an organism  is determined by structural complexity  
The time for body development  and the time for structure -maintenance  are both related to  the 
struc tural complexity of an organism.  On one hand, an organism having  higher structural 
complexity needs a longer time to build up . On the other hand, a higher structural complexity 
gives  a higher potential of repair/maintenance of an organism and permits  a longer period of 
time of structure -maintenance. Taken together, a longer development time  plus a longer 
maintenance time  makes a longer potential of longevity  of an organism  (Figure  6).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 . The p otential of longevity  of an organism  is hidden in structural complexity  
The time for development  and the time  for structure -maintenance  are both related to the structural  
complexity of an  organism. On one hand, an organism having  higher structural complexity needs a longer time 
to build up . On the other hand, a higher structural complexity gives  a higher potential of repair/maintenance Longer development time  
Longer maintenance time  
Longer  potential of l ongevity  
longevity  Higher structural complexity  of an organism  
Higher potential of structure repair/maintenance  *email  : thomasjicun@gmail.com   12 
 and permits  a longer period of structure -maintenance. Taken together, a longer development time  plus a 
longer maintenance time  makes a longer potential of longevity  of an organism . 
 
The individuals of different species’  have different  potentials of longevity  because they have 
different structural complexities. In the same living e nvironment, the individuals of a  species 
that have higher structural complexity will have longer  potential of  longevity.  As a human 
being, we have bigger organs than a mouse. Thus, our body has higher structural complexity 
than that of a mouse.  Therefore, we need a longer time for body development and we can 
maintain our body for a longer period  of time than a mouse. For examp le, human heart is 
bigger than that of  a mouse , thus the lumens of the main  cardiac arteries are larger in human 
heart than in mouse  heart . It is known that a therosclerosis is the main causing factor for 
blockage of cardiac arteries and failure of heart in animals. However , for block ing a cardiac 
artery  in mouse  heart , a small atherosclerotic plaque is sufficient. But for a human, only a big 
atherosclerotic plaque can cause failure of heart. Therefore , human heart and human cardiac 
arteries have higher functional potential th an that of a mouse, and i t takes longer time for 
human heart to go to failure.  
2.5   Limited potential of longevity  of an animal  is a result of  limited structural 
complexity  
An animal has l imited potential of longevity , because it has  limited structural co mplexity . 
Limited structural complexity gives  a limited potential of repair/maintenance  for an animal . 
For example, the diameter s of the main cardiac arteries in a human are  fixed . The non-stop 
growth of atherosclerotic plaques with time will finally  lead to blockage of  an artery by a 
plaque .  The fixed body structure of an adult animal  is determine d by the gene configuration 
of the  species. It is possible that  new species ’ of animals that have  higher  structural 
complexities  than existed  animals  appear by e volution .  However, the increase of structural 
complexity of creatures  will be restricte d by the destructive pressure of  nature. Large animals  
including  whales and elephants  have  often  low populations . One reason is that : these animals 
have big bodies and they need a long time for body development ; thus many children 
whales/elephants cannot survive till reproduction age in natural  environment . If a species of 
animal is too complex on body structu re and most individuals die before  reproduction age, the 
speci es will die  out. Therefore, l imited structural complexity and limited  longevity are 
essential for the survival of a species . 
2.6   The long longevity of a queen ant  is obtained by redirected  development   
The big difference between a queen ant and a worker ant on lifespan  is amazing . Despite 
having the same gene configuration, a queen ant develops in a different way  from other 
female ants.  A queen ant continue s the  body develop ment  and the body grow th after age  of 
maturation . However, for other female ants , the body development  stops at age of maturation. 
The redirected development of queen  ant is  induced by environment factors . This altered 
development makes a queen ant have a distinct body structure  from a worker ant . Namely, t he 
redirected development  make s a queen ant have a higher structural complexity, a higher *email  : thomasjicun@gmail.com   13 
 potential of functionality, and a longer potential of longevity than other ants  (Figure 7). Apart 
from  higher structural complexity , living in a protected environment  may also contribute to 
the longer lifespan  of a queen  ant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7 . Difference s on development  and on longevity between  a queen ant and a worker ant    
Despite having the same gene configuration, a  queen ant develops differently from other female ants. The 
difference on d evelopment between  them  leads to  their differences on the potential of longevity  (PL). A queen 
ant can continue develop ing and grow ing after age  of maturation (Queen ant ). Other female ants stop 
development  at age of maturation (Worker ant ). The redirected  development of a queen ant makes her have a 
higher structural complexity, a higher potential of functionality  (for structure -maintenance) , and a longer 
potential of longevity than other ants.  
 
It is found that s ome genes are “aging -related” or “lifespan -related”. For some scientists,  gene 
modification is a strategy for extending the longevity  of animals. However, if gene  
modification could extend the lifespans of animals , the effect  should be made by altering the 
process of body development  rather than by retarding aging. Modification of a gene can 
possibly redirect body  development and  alter the final structure of an  organism. With altered 
structural complexity and altered potential of functionality, an organism may have an altered 
potential of longevity. In one study, t he research group of Helfand has successfully extended  
the lifespan of drosophila  two times by introducing a mutation on gene Ingy (Mardon, 2003 ).  
Although the mutant drosophila e have  normal metabolism a nd normal flying ability, the 
reprodu cing ability of these individuals was reduced significantly, especially in a condition of 
low calorie nutrition. In another study, the mice that have lower expres sion of protein mTOR 
have  longer lifespan s (Wu, 2013 ).  The mutant mice are healthy ; however t hey are slightly 
smaller than normal mice and are more sensitive to infections.  t Queen ant  
PL of worker ant  
Potential of longevity  of queen ant  Worker ant  
Structual complexity  *email  : thomasjicun@gmail.com   14 
 In these studies, although it is unknown how a genetic modification affec ts body development, 
alteration  of development is evident . The changes on body size, immunity, and/or ability of 
reproduction  are all  evidences of alteration of  body development . Therefore , in our view, a 
strategy for extending the longevity of animals by gene modification cannot be successful.  
Such a strategy may lead to defective body development. W ith defect s on functionality, low er 
chance of survival, and low er rate of reproduction, the modified species cannot survive for a 
long time.  
2.7  The long longevity  of a tree  is obtained by repeated developments  
Many species’ of trees can survive much longer  than animals . One reason is that: trees can 
develop repeatedly each year after age of maturation, but  an animal has only one -time 
development . By repeated developments, a tree can obtain more and more  structural  
complexity and function ality (Figure 8). Each year, a tree will have new branches , and the 
main trunk and “old”  branches will become thicker . With time, part of  the trunk and some 
branches of a tree may lose  their functionality; however  new part of the trunk and new  
branches  can compensate the lost functionality. The repeated developments of a tree are  
genetically controlled. Some t rees seem to have no  genetic limit  on structural  complexity; 
however a catastrophe in  nature  will terminate the development s of a tree . The lifespan of a 
tree is finally a result of  competition between construction and destruction of the tree  in nature.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 . The l ong longevity of a tree  is obtained by  repeated development s    
Some species’ of trees have much longer  potential of longevity  (PL) than animal s. A main reason is that a tree  
undergoes repeated developments  each year after age  of maturation but a n animal has only o ne-time  
development. By repeated developments, a tree can  obtain more and more  structural  complexity and t Animal  Age of maturation of 
a tree or an animal  
Potential of longevity  of a tree  PL of an animal  
Structural   complexity  Tree  A nature catastrophe  *email  : thomasjicun@gmail.com   15 
 functional ity. Some trees see m to have no genetic  limit on structural  complexity; however a nature  catastrophe 
can termi nate the developments  of a tree .  
 
Among all species’ of trees, those that have longer potentials of longevity often have higher 
functionalities on defense and self -protection . These species’ of trees have t hus higher 
structural complexities, and need  longer time for body development till reproduction age. For 
example, a Ginkgo biloba tree can have longevity of more than 3000 years; but it needs 20 
years for maturatio n. A willow tree has longevity of 150 years; but it needs only 2 -3 years for 
maturation. Thus, a tree that has  longer potential  of longevity will have higher risk of death 
before age of maturation. The species’  of trees that have extreme long potential s of longevity 
such as the Ginkgo biloba trees are often the species’ that are on the edge of extinction.  
 
III. Individu al lifespans: more related to  living environment s and living habits  
Despite having  the same  potential of longevity, the individual s of a species  can have quite 
different lifespans. Twin brothers have often different lifespans although they have the same  
genetic background  and a similar structural complexity . Therefore, the lifespan of an 
organism is not completely determined by structure complexit y. In this part,  we will discuss 
the aging -related  lifespan  of human being . With age , we are all approach ing to death by more 
and more  diseases, such as  tumors, arterial hypertension, and atherosclerosis. The d irect cause 
of death  of our body  is often  the failure of a key organ such as  the heart and the brain. Failure 
of a key organ  can be acute, progressive , or chronic.  
Acute failure  of an organ  is often a consequence of breakdown of structural integrity of the 
organ by a severe  injury . However, breakdown  of an organ is often caused by aging of this 
organ or other organs. For example, cerebral bleeding is a fatal disease because it can destroy  
the structural integrity of the brain . However , cerebral bleeding  is often a conseq uence of 
arterial hypertension due to  aging of arterial walls. Progressive failure  of an organ  is often a 
consequence  of tumor occupation  to the  organ . For example, a patient with colon cancer dies 
often from failure of liver, because colon  cancer cells can invade into liver  via portal veins . 
Chronic failure of an organ  is a consequence  of gradual loss of functionality due to aging  of 
the organ . Alzheimer  syndrome  is a disease caused by aging and  chronic failure of the brain.  
Three  factors may  affect  the “lifespan” of a key  organ : rate of aging  of the organ , inducing 
factor  of failure of the organ , and random factors . Firstly, the rate of aging of an organ  is 
determined by the degree and the frequency of damage -exposure  of the organ. Thus, the rate 
of aging of an organ is closely related  to the living circumstance  and the living habit  of an 
individual . The rate s of aging  of tissues  can be quite different in different organs and in 
different individuals. For example, smokers may have much quicker aging of lung than non-
smokers . The i ndivid uals that are often exposed to strong su nlight may have accelerated  aging 
of skin. The i ndividuals who live in a polluted  environment may have  increased  risk of  
chronic pulmonary inflammation s and accelerated  aging of lung.  *email  : thomasjicun@gmail.com   16 
 Secondly, c omplete failure of a n organ takes place often when there is an inducing factor . 
Inducing factors are the factors that can cause overload of an aged organ . For example, 
arterial hypertension is a main causing factor for  cerebral bleeding ; however  occurrence of 
cerebral bleedin g is often promoted  by a strong activation of sympathetic nerves and the heart . 
Excitement of sympathetic nerves can increase further the blood pressure  to artery walls  and 
increase the risk of disruption of an artery  in brain . Cancer patients  die often from infections , 
because  the immune system  of a cancer patient can be  severely destroyed by  the invasive 
cancer cells. Thirdly, some random factor s are also related to  the lifespan of an organ . For 
example, the d egree of  malignancy  of a tumor  determines how long an affected organ can 
“survive ”. However, the grade of malignancy of a tumor  seems to be unpredictable. Taken 
together , the lifespan of a key organ  is related to multiple factors,  and the lifespan of an 
individual is  more determined by the living circumstance  and the living habit of the individual . 
Therefore, for extending our lifespan, the most important is to reduce the risk of damage -
exposure.  
Some animals gain their long lifespans by their special competence s on self -protection  in 
nature . The compe tence of self -protection is a part of functionality of an organism. A tortoise  
can survive more than 10 0 years. However, tortoises obtain their long longevity by long time 
of hibernation . A tortoise  hibernates for  half of its lifetime . During hibernation, a tortoise has  
reduce d risk of exposure  to damage, such as bad weather and dangerous animal s. An african  
elephant  can have a lifespan of 70 years . One reason is that an elephant  has almost no n atural 
enemy except human being!  For human being , one of our se crets to have a longer longevity 
than other animals is that we can build  up a protective living environment .  With higher 
intelligence , we can organize  a society  composed of  agriculture, industry, military, medical 
system , and etc . In such a society, we ha ve higher living security . Therefore, i t is the 
civilization that has given us a longer and longer longevity in the last  five centuries.  
IV. Conclusions  
We have discussed in this paper the determining factors  for the potential of longevity of an 
organism and the influencing factors for the  lifespan of an individual . Development of an 
organi sm is a process of building -up of structural complexity and functionality . However , in 
natural  environment s, the structural complexity of an organism will be  gradually reduc ed with 
age by accumulation of Misrepairs . The maintenance time  of an organism is related to the 
potential of its functionality , which is built in structural complexity . Thus, t he structural 
complexity of an organism determines not only the time for matura tion but also the time for 
structure -maintenance. Namely,  the potential of longevity  of an organism  is determined by  the 
struc tural complexity  of the organism . For animals, limited longevity is a result of limited 
structural complexity. Importantly, limite d structural complexity  and limited longevity are 
essential for the survival of a species. Some trees have long longevity because they can obtain 
additional  structural  complexity by re peated development s. A queen ant has  much longer 
longevity tha n a worker  ant, because  the queen ant  undergo es a “redirected ” development. 
Despite having the same potential of longevity, the individual s of a species can have different 
lifespan s. The lifespan of an individual is more related to his living circumstance  and his 
living habit . *email  : thomasjicun@gmail.com   17 
  
 
References  
1. Haken, H. and Wunderlin, A. (1990) In Kratky K.W. und Wallner F., H. (ed.), Grundprinzipien der 
Selbstorganisation. Wiss . Buchges, Darmstadt.  
2. Marden J., Rogina B., Montooth K. L., Helfand S. L. (2003). Conditional tradeoffs betwee n aging and 
organismal performance of Indy long -lived mutant flies. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100, 3369 –
337310.1073/pnas.0634985100  
3. Wang J, Michelitsch T, Wunderlin A, Mahadeva R.  (2009) Aging as a Consequence of Misr epair – a 
Novel Theory of Aging . ArXiv: 0904.0575 . arxiv.org  
4. Wu JJ, Liu J, Chen EB et al. (2013) Increased mammalian lifespan and a segmental and tissue -specific 
slowing of aging after genetic redu ction of mTOR expression.  Cell Reports , 4:1–8, 2013. 
 