Title: Searching COVID-19 Clinical Research Using Graph Queries: Algorithm
  Development and Validation
Abstract:   Objective: This study aims to consider small graphs of concepts and exploit
them for expressing graph searches over existing COVID-19-related literature,
leveraging the increasing use of graphs to represent and query scientific
knowledge and providing a user-friendly search and exploration experience.
Methods: We considered the COVID-19 Open Research Dataset corpus and summarized
its content by annotating the publications' abstracts using terms selected from
the UMLS and the Ontology of Coronavirus Infectious Disease. Then, we built a
co-occurrence network that includes all relevant concepts mentioned in the
corpus, establishing connections when their mutual information is relevant. A
sophisticated graph query engine was built to allow the identification of the
best matches of graph queries on the network. It also supports partial matches
and suggests potential query completions using shortest paths. Results: We
built a large co-occurrence network, consisting of 128,249 entities and
47,198,965 relationships; the GRAPH-SEARCH interface allows users to explore
the network by formulating or adapting graph queries; it produces a
bibliography of publications, which are globally ranked; and each publication
is further associated with the specific parts of the query that it explains,
thereby allowing the user to understand each aspect of the matching.
Conclusions: Our approach supports the process of query formulation and
evidence search upon a large text corpus; it can be reapplied to any scientific
domain where documents corpora and curated ontologies are made available.

Full Text: Original Paper
Searching COVID-19 Clinical Research Using Graph Quer ies:
Algor ithm Development and Validation
Francesco Invernici, MSc; Anna Bernasconi, PhD; Stefano Ceri, PhD
Department of Electronics, Information, and Bioengineering, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
Corr esponding Author:
Anna Bernasconi, PhD
Department of Electronics, Information, and Bioengineering
Politecnico di Milano
Via Ponzio 34/5
Milan, 20133
Italy
Phone: 39 23993494
Fax: 39 23993411
Email: anna.bernasconi@polimi.it
Abstr act
Backgr ound: Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, >1 million studies have been collected within the COVID-19
Open Research Dataset, a corpus of manuscripts created to accelerate research against the disease. Their related abstracts hold a
wealth of information that remains largely unexplored and difficult to search due to its unstructured nature. Keyword-based search
is the standard approach, which allows users to retrie ve the documents of a corpus that contain (all or some of) the words in a
target list. This type of search, however, does not provide visual support to the task and is not suited to expressing comple x queries
or compensating for missing specif ications.
Objecti ve: This study aims to consider small graphs of concepts and exploit them for expressing graph searches over existing
COVID-19–related literature, leveraging the increasing use of graphs to represent and query scientif ic knowledge and providing
a user-friendly search and exploration experience.
Methods: We considered the COVID-19 Open Research Dataset corpus and summarized its content by annotating the publications’
abstracts using terms selected from the Unified Medical Language System and the Ontology of Corona virus Infectious Disease.
Then, we built a co-occurrence netw ork that includes all relevant concepts mentioned in the corpus, establishing connections
when their mutual information is relevant. A sophisticated graph query engine was built to allow the identif ication of the best
matches of graph queries on the netw ork. It also supports partial matches and suggests potential query completions using shortest
paths.
Results: We built a large co-occurrence netw ork, consisting of 128,249 entities and 47,198,965 relationships; the
GRAPH-SEARCH interf ace allows users to explore the netw ork by formulating or adapting graph queries; it produces a bibliograph y
of publications, which are globally ranked; and each publication is further associated with the specif ic parts of the query that it
explains, thereby allowing the user to understand each aspect of the matching.
Conclusions: Our approach supports the process of query formulation and evidence search upon a large text corpus; it can be
reapplied to any scientif ic domain where documents corpora and curated ontologies are made available.
(J Med Internet Res 2024;26:e52655) doi: 10.2196/52655
KEYW ORDS
big data corpus; clinical research; co-occurrence netw ork; COVID-19 Open Research Dataset; CORD-19; graph search; Named
Entity Recognition; Neo4j; text mining
Introduction
Since the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak in early 2020,
important clinical research efforts have been targeted atunderstanding the COVID-19 disease. More than 1 million
studies have been collected within the COVID-19 Open
Research Dataset (CORD-19), a corpus of manuscripts created
to accelerate the research against the disease. Their related
J Med Internet Res 2024 | vol. 26 | e52655 | p. 1 https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
(page number not for citation purposes)Invernici et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXabstracts hold a wealth of information that remains largely
unexplored and difficult to search due to its unstructured nature.
Searching over the literature is a nontri vial task, as it strongly
relies on the quality of the data corpus, the characteristics of
the search portal, and the language used to express the search.
Keyword-based search is the standard search approach, which
allows users to retrie ve the documents of a corpus that contain
some of the words in a specif ied target list [1,2]. However, this
type of search lacks visual support for the task and is not suitable
for expressing comple x research queries or compensating for
missing specif ications.
The development of frontend tools and visualizations for
COVID-19 knowledge graphs has been motivated by several
works [3,4]. We then explored the use of small graph-based
queries that can be built visually [5] to empo wer a literature
exploration tool; the GRAPH-SEARCH system stems from this
motivation, providing both a visual language to express search
queries and a friendly tool to explore relevant publications,
which highlights the relationships between the original graph
queries and an underlying corpus of scientif ic evidence, in the
spirit of literature-based disco very [6].
To support this idea, the underlying textual corpus must first
be analyzed and enriched; in our approach, the CORD-19 was
expressed in the form of a co-occurrence netw ork. First, we
annotated all the abstracts with terms from the Unified Medical
Language System (UMLS) [7] and the Corona virus Infectious
Disease Ontology (CIDO) [8]. This step closely aligns with
classical work on ontology-based annotation (refer to Semantic
MEDLINE [9] and our previous study on genomic metadata
annotation [10,11]). Second, we built a comprehensi ve
co-occurrence netw ork that includes all relevant clinical and
biological concepts mentioned in the corpus, linking them based
on their co-occurrence in given abstracts.
The visual language used to express a query over the netw ork
describes concepts as nodes and their copresence within research
abstracts as undirected edges; some concepts are associated
with medical conditions, whereas others are associated with
treatments or biological entities. We also allow modif iers.
Queries run on the netw ork may correspond to the expressed
graph pattern or to a selected subpart.
The query semantics corresponds to extracting scientif ic
evidence (ie, publications) from the corpus, in support of the
existence of the relationships linking the expressed concepts;
each search process extracts the references that best explain the
relationships occurring within the query . When a specif ied pathis not present in the co-occurrence netw ork, alternati ve scored
and ranked shortest paths connecting the nodes expressed in
the query are proposed to the user (refer to the Methods section).
The search output provides a ranking of references because of
their weight, summing up the support that they provide to several
relationships in the query .
Our GRAPH-SEARCH implementation is supported by a
graphical interf ace (refer to the Data Availability section) that
allows the user to express the queries and to interpret the results
in terms of concepts explained by each disco vered reference,
thus enabling the users to better qualify the query during the
interaction; in addition, users can read the textual abstracts of
the retrie ved references. Such interacti ve exploration of the
search space allows for exploring assumptions and for
progressi vely adapting them as a result of existing evidence.
The manuscript is organized as follows: we first describe the
CORD-19, the characteristics of the co-occurrence netw ork
representing CORD-19 abstracts, the technological process of
building the netw ork, the graph search operation, and the web
user interf ace that allows us to express graph queries and explore
the retrie ved results. We then present a series of example use
case (UC) queries relevant to COVID-19 research and review
the current state of the art. We then evaluate the benef its of
using our GRAPH-SEARCH as opposed to full-te xt indexed
databases and keyword search. Finally , we draw our conclusions.
Methods
The CORD-19 Corpus
CORD-19 [12] is a corpus of academic publications about
COVID-19 and related corona virus research; it was released
and maintained by the Allen Institute for AI in collaboration
with The White House Office of Science and Technology Polic y
and other partners. Published articles and preprints were
collected from several archi ves, including PubMed,
PubMedCentral, bioRxi v, and arXiv; since its release, it has
served as the basis of many COVID-19 text mining and
disco very systems [12]. The final release of June 2, 2022,
indexes >1 million publications. As summarized in Figure 1,
approximately 79% of the documents in CORD-19 have an
abstract. Out of them, around 41% have a full-te xt JSON file
available, while <11% of available full-te xt publications have
no abstract in the metadata table. Thus, we decided to focus on
data set records with an abstract. The file containing the
metadata of publications in the data set is a comma-separated
table (CORD-19 metadata.csv) including the following:
J Med Internet Res 2024 | vol. 26 | e52655 | p. 2 https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
(page number not for citation purposes)Invernici et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXFigur e 1. Euler -Venn diagram of the overlap of publications with abstract and publications with full-te xt JSON from PDF or from PubMedCentral
(PMC) in the COVID-19 Open Research Dataset (CORD-19).
•A unique identif ier cord_uid for a cluster of different
records of the same publication—upon it, we performed
deduplication and subsequent reconciliation of the other
metadata of the cluster into a single record.
•Title of the publication—we detected the language and
filtered out those not in English.
•Abstract of the publication—only records with an actual
abstract were retained.
•Publish_time—the distrib ution of publication times, shown
in Figure 2, shows that COVID-19 publications increased
in the first half of 2020. Spikes at the beginning of each
year correspond to publications whose publish time is
incomplete (ie, only the year field was filled). Publications
before 2020 that are concerned with Middle EastRespiratory Syndrome, Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome, and the corona virus were remo ved.
•Journal’ s abbre viated name—fuzzy matching of the
abbre viated names was performed with a list of full names
obtained from Scopus [13].
•Authors and DOI of the publication
•Number of citations recei ved (ie, through numCitedBy),
obtained by SemanticScholar application programming
interf aces (APIs) [14]
Records from CORD-19 are already harmonized (refer to the
study by Wang et al [12]), resulting in distinct cord_uid keys.
However, several records of the same publication are included,
with different metadata. We deduplicated them and retained
just 1 record (the one published in a peer-reviewed journal, if
available, else the richest one in metadata).
Figur e 2. Line plot showing the 10-base logarithm of the number of publications (y-axis) per publish time and date (x-axis).
J Med Internet Res 2024 | vol. 26 | e52655 | p. 3 https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
(page number not for citation purposes)Invernici et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXCo-Occurr ence Netw ork
The co-occurrence netw ork was built to support graph search;
it consists of entities and relationships mined from the title and
abstract fields of the metadata table. For building it, we
considered 2 sources: UMLS and CIDO. UMLS [7] is a generic
source that includes many vocabularies and covers the entire
spectrum of medicine; CIDO [8] is a community-dri ven
open-source biomedical ontology in the area of COVID-19.
While CIDO has a simple concept structure, UMLS concepts
have a taxonomy that includes macrocate gories at a coarse level;
each macrocate gory is further characterized by a type. Currently ,
we consider the following UMLS macrocate gories:
ACTIVITIES_AND_BEHA VIORS, ANATOMY ,
CHEMICALS_AND_DR UGS, CONCEPTS_AND_IDEAS,
DEVICES, DISORDERS, ENTITY ,
GENES_AND_MOLECOLAR_SEQ UENCES,
GEOGRAPHIC_AREAS, LIVING_BEINGS, OBJECTS,
OCCUP ATIONS, ORGANIZA TIONS, PHENOMEN A,
PHYSIOLOGY , and PROCEDURES.
As attrib utes, entities of the co-occurrence netw ork include the
name, an Umls_id when the entity is extracted from UMLS,
and the frequenc y associated with the entity (ie, the number of
documents in CORD-19 capturing that concept). Relationships
in the co-occurrence netw ork express the co-occurrence of 2entities in ≥1 documents of CORD-19. Each relationship has
the following attrib utes: a name (ie, built as concatenation in
alphabetic order of the names of the entities that co-occur); a
frequenc y (ie, the number of abstracts that mention such
co-occurring entities); and several statistical indicators of the
relationship’ s strength within the corpus, such as the pointwise
mutual information value (comparing the relati ve frequenc y of
2 concepts occurring together in the text to the probability of
either concept occurring independently [15]), the normalized
pointwise mutual information (NPMI) value (normalized by
the Shannon self-information, ranging from −1 to 1 [16]), and
the Cramer V value (measuring the statistical signif icance of
the co-occurrence between 2 entities [17]).
Figure 3illustrates the process of ontology creation at a
conceptual level. The process applies to textual abstracts (refer
to Figure 3where we consider an excerpt of the textual abstract
of the study by Logette et al [18]) and consists of an entity
recognition task aiming to extract the known ontological terms
(ie, either from UMLS or from CIDO), followed by an entity
linking task; eventually , we produce a co-occurrence netw ork,
whose entities are extracted terms and whose relationships
connect entities that co-occur , weighted by the strength of the
co-occurrence. Next, we detail the data extraction and
transformation process.
Figur e 3. Rationale of co-occurrence netw ork construction. Ontological terms are recognized in textual abstracts using entity recognition; then, this
process is reiterated with approximately 660,000 publications’ abstracts. Terms are connected to each other using entity linking; each relationship
between entities is associated with several properties representing the co-occurrence weight, using different statistical methods. The generated connected
co-occurrence netw ork has approximately 128,000 concepts and approximately 47 million relationships. ACE2: angiotensin-con verting enzyme 2;
CIDO: Corona virus Infectious Disease Ontology; NPMI: normalized pointwise mutual information; UMLS: Unified Medical Language System.
Data Provisioning and Co-Occurr ence Netw ork
Construction
Overview
The data provision workflo w is represented in Figure 4[18]; it
follows the extract-load-transform paradigm. Data were
extracted from CORD-19 and loaded into the data storage
system. The pipeline produces 3 data objects: the co-occurrencenetw ork; the metadata table; and the inverted index, that is, a
simple postings list whose keys are the relationships of the
co-occurrence netw ork and whose elements are links to the
relevant publications where such relationships co-occur . Other
data tables contain intermediate results of the extraction and
curation of the entities, that is, the nodes of the co-occurrence
netw ork and the computation of the co-occurrence measures
used for the relationships. For storing data tables, we selected
J Med Internet Res 2024 | vol. 26 | e52655 | p. 4 https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
(page number not for citation purposes)Invernici et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXthe MariaDB relational engine [19]; for storing the
co-occurrence netw ork, we selected the Neo4j graph data engine[20].
Figur e 4. Workflo w diagram of the GRAPH-SEARCH data provision pipeline. Tasks are performed sequentially; each task uses data objects and
produces data objects, starting from the raw COVID-19 Open Research Dataset (CORD-19) metadata.csv file present in CORD-19, which is translated
into metadata.csv once cleaned. The final outcome of the pipeline is a Neo4j database containing the netw ork.
Data Loading
Three tasks apply to raw CORD-19 data and produce a metadata
table. Metadata were obtained by using the “GET metadata”
from the S3 bucket of Allen Institute of AI; then, we performed
a “Wrangling and cleaning” step and the “Augment and load”
step on the cleaned metadata table with information from the
external APIs.
Entities Mining and Linking
The “Mine entities and link” task takes as input the curated and
augmented metadata table and produces the raw_entity table.
With a single pass over the title and abstract, we performed
typical information retrie val steps such as lexical analysis,
remo val of stopw ords, stemming, and lemmatization. Then, we
performed named entity recognition (NER), consisting of the
identif ication and extraction of entities from unstructured text
and linking to UMLS and CIDO; specif ically , we used the
en_core_sci_lg model of the scispaCy Python package. The
selected model is particularly suited for processing
English-based scientif ic literature, providing an approximately
785,000 word vocabulary with 600k word vectors, with a
declared F1-score for mentions of 68.67 (refer to the study by
Nuemann et al [21] for details on the achie ved performances).
Entities are linked to UMLS and CIDO by associating each
concept with the UMLS identif ier (with its related type and
macroclass) and the CIDO identif ier (if available).
Entity Curation
The “Entity curation” task aggre gates the occurrences in the
raw_entity table and outputs the entity_materialized table,
collecting all the entities to be used as nodes of the
co-occurrence netw ork. In this pass, we excluded the
occurrences of the entities that score a low similarity with
UMLS or CIDO concepts; we used a normalized string similarity
measure based on the Levenshtein distance and a threshold
value of 0.7. We also included within entities some utility terms
that indicate level modif iers (eg, “high” and “increased”) orcausati ve connectors (ie, “induces”). Eventually , we added the
entity type and macrocate gory using their names in UMLS.
Link Mining
The “Link mining and inverted index creation” task uses the
raw_entity table and the entity_materialized table to generate
the bigram table (ie, information on the links of the
co-occurrence netw ork) and the bigram_publications table that
we use as an inverted indexin the information retrie val process.
A co-occurrence is a relationship between 2 concepts, and it
exists when those 2 concepts occur in the same document. Each
relationship is named using the convention “X.name—Y .name, ”
where X and Y are the 2 concepts expressed as nodes, which it
connects, and X.name precedes Y.name alphabetically .
We designed a greedy algorithm—optimized for big data
conte xts—to extract the relationships in a single pass over the
publications. This algorithm requires 2 read-only lookup tables,
built before the execution: publication_entities (ie, for each
publication a list of mentioned entities) and entity_publications
(ie, for each entity , a list of mentioning publications). The
comple xity of the algorithm is o(N2), where Nis the number of
entities in the entity_materialized list; in practice, the number
of required comparisons is low, as the number of entities in
each publication is much lower than the total number of entities
selected in the “Entity Curation” step.
Graph Consolidation
The “Graph consolidation” task selects data from the
entity_materialized and bigram tables and migrates them to the
Neo4j instance to create the co-occurrence netw ork.
The nodes are curated in the previous “Entity Curation” step.
The relationships of co-occurrence are chosen at this stage,
based on their NPMI, which is the point estimate of the Mutual
Information, normalized by the Shannon self-information (taking
a value between −1 and +1); this compares the probability that
the 2 entities occur together . We exclude the relationships with
NPMI≤0, as a nonpositi ve NPMI indicates that the relationship
is not signif icant.
J Med Internet Res 2024 | vol. 26 | e52655 | p. 5 https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
(page number not for citation purposes)Invernici et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXThe resulting co-occurrence netw ork has 128,249 entities and
47,198,965 relationships, extracted from 662,105 initial
publications. Using the Neo4j Graph Data Science library [22],
we verified that the graph is a unique connected component;
such a condition is essential to ensure that every possible
formulated graph query can be matched on the co-occurrence
netw ork.
Graph Query Searc h
A graph query Qis a connected graph formed by nodes and
undirected relationships, where nodes are the set of entities
appearing in Qand rels(Q) is a set of arbitrary relationships
connecting some pairs of entities in Q. A subgraph Q'is simply
a connected subset of the nodes and relationships of Q. The
search strate gy is composed of 2 steps: matching of graph query
against the co-occurrence netw ork and extracting the relevant
publications.Graph query matc hing is the operation of comparing the graph
query Qwith the co-occurrence netw ork Ncreated along the
procedure described in the Data Provisioning and
Co-Occurr ence Network Construction section. By construction,
each entity in Qis contained in N, whereas relationships in
rels(Q) , arbitrarily created in Q, may not be present in N. Both
Qand Nare connected graphs with undirected relationships;
then, matching Qwithin Ncan be seen as an instance of inexact
graph matching [23].
Figure 5guides the intuition of the matching operation. A graph
query A-B (in blue) is searched over a co-occurrence netw ork
(in white). No direct relationship exists between A and B on
the netw ork. However, several alternati ve finite paths exist (ie,
A-X-B, A-Y-Z-B, or A-V-Y-Z-B). Among these, A-X-B is
found to be the “shortest path” between A and B, as its length
or distance (in green) equals 1.
Figur e 5. Graph query matching operation.
All entities in Qare matched in N; then, for each relationship r
in rels(Q) , connecting nodes αand β, we retrie ve the “shortest
paths” within Nthat connect αand β, that is, a chain of
relationships r1', r2', ..., rn', where r'is in rels(N) , r1'starts from
node α, and rn'ends in node β.
Shortest paths are computed using the All Pairs Shortest Path
function allShortestP aths available in Cypher , Neo4j v4.4 [20].
Candidate shortest paths are ranked by the average of the NPMI
property associated with each relationship along the path; we
retain the top 10 paths in the ranking.
We refer to the set of candidate shortest paths as expansion ; the
selection of exactly 1 preferred path among the candidates of
the expansion is performed interacti vely by the user of the search
system, as it is strictly domain or conte xt specif ic.
Relevant publications extraction corresponds to the retrie val of
the publications that mention concepts of the matched graph,
using the inverted index. We access the inverted index by
relationship name, using either rwhen it appears in the
relationships rels(N) of the co-occurrence netw ork or all the
relationships r1', r2', ..., rn'appearing in the specif ied path(r) .
The score of a publication Prelati ve to a query Q(ie, the number
of explained relationships) is computed as follows:
The addends of the external summation represent a score
assigned to each relationship rin Q. Each addend captures how
well Prepresents r; it is equal to 1 if Pdirectly mentions the
relationship of Q(eg, when path(r)=r' , with length 1) or if P
mentions all the relationships of path(r) . Otherwise, it equals a
fraction of 1, counting the number of relationships r1', r2', …,
rn'of path(r) mentioned in P, divided by the length of path(r) .
Extracted publications are ordered by their score; they are further
described by other properties, such as the sum of the NPMI of
all the mentioned relationships and the date of publication.
Running Example
Consider Figure 6as an example of the four steps performed
during the search:
1.Create graph query (Figure 6A): Nodes are chosen among
the concepts existing in the co-occurrence netw ork; node
names can be found through a dedicated browser working
either by autocompletion of user-typed content (ie, matching
terminologies concepts) or by selection of category and
type and the contained concepts; search on multiple
terminologies at the same time is allowed. For each concept,
we provide a description and ID from the original source.
Relationships can be drawn between any pair of nodes.
2.Find paths (Figure 6B): For each pair of entities connected
by a relationship in the graph query , the Neo4j graph is
queried to find the shortest paths (at most 10) with top
average NPMI scores.
3.Select paths (Figure 6C): The user selects the most relevant
path for each original relationship that has been expanded.
J Med Internet Res 2024 | vol. 26 | e52655 | p. 6 https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
(page number not for citation purposes)Invernici et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX4.Retrie ve publications and return ranking to the user (Figure
6D): The system collects the names of all the relationships
from the expanded graph query (computed in step B and
selected in step C) and exploits them to retrie ve the posting
lists of publications (from the inverted index). It computes
the relationships explained by each publication. Then, itranks the publications by (1) the number of explained
relationships of the original graph query (refer to equation
1), (2) the sum of NPMI scores of the relationships, and (3)
the publication date. Finally , it shows the complete list with
the publications’ metadata.
Figur e 6. (A) Example of a graph query with 6 concepts and 5 relationships. (B) Match of graph query on the co-occurrence netw ork, with the search
of shortest paths (in the dashed spaces called expansions). Considering the relationship between SARS-CoV -2 and angiotensin-con verting enzyme 2,
its expansion includes 3 paths of length 3, each characterized by 2 intermediate nodes. Light green paths have the highest average normalized pointwise
mutual information (NPMI) of each expansion. (C) Regardless of the suggested paths with the highest average NPMI, users can select any path (dark
green). (D) A list of publications, ranked by their score, is extracted; the score is computed using equation 1 and considers all the relationships in the
selected paths that are mentioned in the publication. ACE2: angiotensin-con verting enzyme 2; AngII: angiotensin II.
In Figure 6D, we observ e that 5 expansions are produced: the
first publication scores 1 in 4 expansions and 1/2 in the
expansion at the top-right end of the graph query . Indeed,
publication 1 only includes the relationship (AngII)-(1,0), which
is half of the selected shortest path that connects (AngII) and
(Vascular Permeability).
The second publication scores 0 in 1 expansion, as there is no
path between (AngII) and (Vascular Permeability); 1 in 3
expansions; and 2/3 in the expansion at the left end of the graph
query; the relationship (SARS-CoV -2)-(1,0) is not mentioned.
Ethical Considerations
Ethics appro val was not applicable for this study .
Results
Web Interface
With GRAPH-SEARCH, the researcher can express a query in
the form of a graph query on a web interf ace and retrie ve a list
of CORD-19 publications that best correspond to the query .
During the search process, each link in the original graph query
is expanded and matched with the co-occurrence netw ork. When
a relationship in the query is not available in the co-occurrence
netw ork, an expansion may suggest that several sets of concepts
can explain a relationship in the original graph query; therefore,
10 ranked paths are proposed to the user, who may express a
preference according to their interest. After selecting 1 path foreach expanded relationship, GRAPH-SEARCH provides a list
of publications ranked by the number of explained relationships
of the original graph query .
The GRAPH-SEARCH application service exposes a web user
interf ace to query the co-occurrence netw ork and exploit the
graph-dri ven search methodology described in the Graph Query
Searchsection; it contains a backend (ie, web server that exposes
a Representational State Transfer Application Programming
Interf ace for high-le vel retrie val operations) and a frontend (ie,
visual interf ace that exploits the Representational State Transfer
Application Programming Interf aces to use the back end).
The web interf ace has been designed and implemented following
the major steps of the algorithm described in the Running
Example subsection above. The user experience has been
modeled as a multipage application; for each step of the retrie val
strate gy, different API services and a different page were
implemented.
The frontend is built with the Vue.js frame work and the D3.js
library for graph illustrations; instead, the back end is written in
Python and includes two components:
1.Swagger_serv er, which implements the web service logic,
interf aces, and the models necessary to handle the
persistence and asynchronicity behaviors of a multiuser
system. We used the conne xion frame work, a flask-based
J Med Internet Res 2024 | vol. 26 | e52655 | p. 7 https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
(page number not for citation purposes)Invernici et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXweb frame work, and SQLAlchemy as the database
abstraction layer .
2.Core, which implements the retrie val strate gy and provides
high-le vel programming interf aces for it. This package has
been designed as an independent library that can be
embedded in other applications, as it has been done with
the back end service. Its implementation relies on several
Python libraries, such as Neo4j, netw orkx, and
SQLAlchemy .
UC Queries
UC1 emphasizes the strength of exploratory search over graphs
by supporting users in selecting graph portions, considering
eventually accepting proposed expansions, and browsing results
in terms of NPMI and explained relationships. UCs of increasing
comple xity are provided next, offering examples of searches
upon graph queries with different shapes: UC2 and UC3
introduce very simple linear graph queries (ie, 1 chain of nodes),
UC4 shows the use of a Y-shaped graph query , and UC5 and
UC6 represent more comple x shapes with nodes forming
triangles.
UC1: Genetic Mechanisms of Critical Illness in
COVID-19
Pairo-Castineira et al [23] revealed previously undescribed
molecular mechanisms of critical illness in patients withCOVID-19 with genome-wide studies. The results of such
studies may provide therapeutic targets to modulate the host
immune response to promote survi val. Inspired by this
publication, we create a graph query including relevant human
genes that are related to higher or lower severity of COVID-19
(eg, IFNAR2, CCR2, and TYK2 genes), and we link them to the
change in the severity of the disease (Figure 7A). Since the
research idea is broad, we start the exploratory process focusing
on a subgraph of the graph query (refer to the nodes in red
selected in Figure 7A). Here, we only consider the effect of the
increase of expression in the CCR2 gene. Figure 7B shows how
GRAPH-SEARCH expands the path between the concepts
“High” and “Gene Expression” (not otherwise connected in the
co-occurrence netw ork). According to NPMI values, the most
relevant concept connecting them is “Up-Re gulation
(Physiology). ” Figure 7C shows that the path going through
this concept has been selected by the user among the other
proposed. The Results page (Figure 7D) shows a publication
(Teixeira et al [24]) that covers 4 (80%) out of 5 explained
relationships of the original graph query . This means that out
of the 5 original relationships of the selected portion of the graph
query , only 4 (80%) are explained by the publication (all except
for the one between “Gene Expression” and “High”). At this
point, the user can consider other portions of the graph query
or the entire query .
Figur e 7. GRAPH-SEARCH screens dedicated to use case 1 (UC1): (A) graph query , (B) find paths, (C) select paths, and (D) first publication on the
results page.
UC2: COVID-19 and Cystic Fibrosis
Cystic fibrosis is a disorder that affects mostly the lungs, the
digesti ve system, and other organs in the body . It is widely
known that COVID-19 also affects the respiratory system. How
has their connection been investigated in CORD-19? The
simplest possible graph query in GRAPH-SEARCH holds 2
nodes (ie, cystic fibrosis and COVID-19) connected by 1
relationship of co-occurrence. “Cystic fibrosis” is representedby UMLS concept ID C0010674, and “COVID-19” is
represented by the UMLS concept ID C5203670. The 2 concepts
are not directly connected within the netw ork; among the
proposed paths in the expansion, we choose the one through
the concept “Respiratory secretion viscosity alteration” (UMLS
ID 3537094). Only 1 publication in CORD-19 explains this
path, covering it completely , with an NPMI sum of 0.5668.
Kratochvil et al [25] characterized the composition of respiratory
secretions of intubated patients with COVID-19 infection,
J Med Internet Res 2024 | vol. 26 | e52655 | p. 8 https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
(page number not for citation purposes)Invernici et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXfinding that they closely resemble those of cystic fibrosis, a
minor observ ation unrelated to clinical severity. In general, the
lack of relevant clinical references confirmed our expectation
that cystic fibrosis did not impact COVID-19 severity.
UC3. COVID-19 and Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory
Drugs
During the second year of the pandemic, interest arose in the
possibility of interv ening at the onset of mild to moderate
COVID-19 symptoms in outpatients (instead of hospitalized
patients); it was suggested that this could prevent the progression
to a more severe illness and long-term complications. More
specif ically , Perico et al [26] investig ated the use of
anti-inflammatory drugs, especially nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) as a therapeutic strate gy. In
our graph query , we include the following as main concepts:
“COVID-19” (C5203670), “Outpatients” (C0029921),
“Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non Steroidal” (C0003211), and
“Cyclooxygenase 2 Inhibitors” (C1257954), with the last being
a specif ic class of NSAIDs. In this case, no expansion of the
original graph query is performed, as all the relationships arepresent in the co-occurrence netw ork. The Results page contains
a list of 440 publications, whose abstracts discuss the concepts
in the graph query from different perspecti ves and approaches.
The top 3 results include work from Consolaro et al [27], a
home-treatment algorithm based on anti-inflammatory drugs;
Popo vych et al [28], discussing the therapeutic efficacy of the
BNO 1030 extract, which is a phytotherapeutic
anti-inflammatory agent; and Sava et al [29], exposing the
results of a 90-day treatment of patients with severe COVID-19
with a specif ic NSAID drug, tocilizumab .
UC4: Elevated Blood Glucose Levels and COVID-19
Severity
Elevated blood glucose levels are considered a risk factor for
the severity of the disease. With GRAPH-SEARCH, we
compose a Y-shaped graph query (Figure 8), expressing that
high levels of blood glucose or increasing blood glucose can
induce a severe illness. This example makes sophisticated use
of utility terms; these are provided in a specif ic list of the
concepts’ browser of GRAPH-SEARCH.
Figur e 8. Graph query of use case 4 (UC4), with Unified Medical Language System concepts IDs in red.
Consequently , we obtain a list of 395 results, where the
top-rank ed publication explains 5 out of 5 relationships. Logette
et al [18] reported on the relationship between blood glucose
levels and the severity of COVID-19. All following publications,
ranked in descending order by the number of explained
relationships of the original graph query , explain at most 3 out
of 5 relations.
UC5: COVID-19, Angiotensin-Con verting Enzyme 2,
and Cardio vascular Diseases
Patel et al [30] hypothesized that the infection caused by
SARS-CoV -2 could be associated with the shedding of
angiotensin-con verting enzyme 2 (ACE2). In their study , it is
suggested that in patients with cardio vascular diseases, there is
increased shedding of ACE2; consequently , higher levels ofACE2 in blood circulation are associated with the
downre gulation of membrane-bound ACE2. The graph query
in Figure 9A expresses this query by connecting patients with
COVID-19 infection with cardio vascular diseases; as they have
more circulating ACE2, there is a downre gulation of
membrane-bound ACE2. When running this query , 2
relationships are not found in the co-occurrence netw ork; the
first paths suggested by the system as possible explanations are
not meaningful with regard to the conte xt; thus, we select
alternati ve concepts, that is, “Subacute Endocarditis” and
“Intensi ve Care Unit” (Figure 9B). Results can be ranked by
the number of citations; we found the studies by Yamaguchi et
al [31] and Gupta et al [32] particularly interesting, as they
propose solutions for the prevention and treatment of the side
effects of COVID-19 for patients with cardio vascular diseases.
J Med Internet Res 2024 | vol. 26 | e52655 | p. 9 https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
(page number not for citation purposes)Invernici et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXFigur e 9. (A) Graph query of use case 5 (UC5) and (B) found paths.
UC6: COVID-19 Vaccines and Myocarditis
The side effects of vaccines are a topic of relevance. Here, we
investigate the connection between events of heart inflammation
(eg, myocarditis) among adolescents and the COVID-19
Moderna vaccine. We compose a graph query in
GRAPH-SEARCH with 4 nodes (Figure 10A); a triangle is
formed by “Adolescent (age group)” (C0205653), “Myocarditis”
(C0027059), and the “Moderna COVID-19 Vaccine” (CIDO
ID obo.V O 0005157); the vaccine entity is connected to the
“COVID-19” (C5203670) node. COVID-19 and Moderna
COVID-19 vaccine are not directly connected; among the
possible paths suggested by GRAPH-SEARCH, the 2 scoring
the highest sum of mutual information are through
“Vaccination” and “Myopericarditis. ” The latter refers to bothmyocarditis and pericarditis (ie, the inflammation of the
pericardium, which is the sac that surrounds the heart). The
latter concept allows us to expand the initial query to complete
the match with the co-occurrence netw ork (Figure 10B). On the
Results page, 190 bibliographic resources are provided. The
top-rank ed one, which explains all 4 relationships of the graph
query , is a report by Gargano et al [33] that highlights the
implications of the use of messenger RNA vaccines with a
higher risk for myocarditis in male individuals aged 12 to 29
years. The following results do not explain the relationship
between the COVID-19 Moderna vaccine and COVID-19
through myopericarditis, as they explain only 3 relations. These
results, for instance, report adverse events of myocarditis after
vaccination in the United States [34] and Korea [35].
Figur e 10. (A) Graph query of use case 6 (UC6) and (B) found paths.
Query Performances
GRAPH-SEARCH queries are composed of two
computationally intensi ve steps: (1) the graph query matching
over the co-occurrence netw ork and (2) the retrie val and ranking
of publications related to the query . For each such step, we run
a performance analysis.
Specif ically , we simulated random queries with 2, 4, 6, 8, or 10
nodes from the existing co-occurrence netw ork; we assume that
these are the typical UC scenarios, as queries represent small
queries of researchers created through the graphical interf ace.We separately measure computation times of the first and second
steps (shown in Figures 11A and 11B, respecti vely); each
experiment has been repeated on 10 queries, generated randomly
using the “Random walk with restarts sampling” method of
Neo4j. We observ e that the computational times for graph
matching in all cases is <2.2 seconds, and its growth is
less-than-linear with the number of the nodes, whereas the
retrie val operation typically takes up to 3 seconds, with a small
number of outliers due to cache misses; the resulting user delay
in these scenarios seems quite acceptable.
J Med Internet Res 2024 | vol. 26 | e52655 | p. 10 https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
(page number not for citation purposes)Invernici et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXFigur e 11. Box plots measuring the time for (A) the graph matching operation and (B) the publication retrie val operation performed using complete
graph queries of 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 nodes (each repeated 10 times).
We also created random graph queries by remo ving increasing
percentages of their relationships to simulate the difference
between exact and inexact graph search (thereby triggering the
search for alternati ve shortest paths); computational times (not
shown for brevity) are not signif icantly affected.
Related Work
In this section, we review classic approaches to search over
co-occurrence netw orks. Then, we focus on the specif ic use of
bio-ontologies in information extraction systems, and finally ,
we propose a close comparison with COVID-19–specif ic search
systems.
Semantic-Netw ork Searc h
The task of searching and extracting literature documents over
co-occurrence netw orks with graph-based queries can be
considered through the subproblems that compose it. To query
a co-occurrence netw ork with a graph-lik e query , a similarity
measure between graphs must be defined. Existing methods in
the conte xt of graph databases include definitions of graph edit
distances and maximum common subgraphs [36], but a later
approach introduced a similarity measure based on a graph
kernel between pairs of documents, which exploits the shortest
paths between nodes as units to compare graphs [37].
Considering the construction of the co-occurrence netw orks
from data sets of literature documents, different approaches are
available to extract concepts to represent nodes in the netw ork
and connections between them. The survey by Han et al [38]
and the study by Shi et al [39] present all the main
methodologies and text mining pipeline architectures, which
are applied in this study to engineering and design (ie, subsets
of scientif ic literature). G-Bean [40] is also a relevant related
work, that is, a graph-based tool that exploits ontologies for
graph-based query expansion to support the user search intention
disco very.Literature Annotation and Bio-Ontologies
The incorporation of bio-ontologies in information extraction
and information retrie val has demonstrated its efficacy through
diverse applications, such as patent information retrie val [41]
and identif ication of concept domains [42]. Bio-ontologies are
also applied in natural language processing tasks, such as NER
[43]. Moreo ver, Wang et al [44] illustrated the application of
bio-ontologies in retrie ving biomedical data sets, while Mara ver
et al [45] emphasized their role in literature search facilitation
and metadata organization. The potential for refining search
queries through ontology-guided expansion is also a recurring
theme in the biomedical literature for information retrie val.
Diaz-Galiano et al [46] and Dong et al [47] show query
expansion methodologies using different medical vocabularies.
A fundamental aspect of research in this domain pertains to the
availability and use of suitable corpora and data sets; previous
studies [48,49] have provided foundational annotated and
curated resources that underpin the experimental frame works
addressing these tasks. Lately , the integration of bio-ontologies
with language models has also gained traction within the conte xt
of bioinformation extraction [50,51].
COVID-19–Specific Literature Disco very
With the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, several
open-access data sets have been collected, including the National
Institute of Health’ s COVID-19 [52], the Human Corona viruses
Data Initiati ve [53], and COVIDScholar [54].
The CORD-19 data set recei ved the widest attention. Several
knowledge graphs that exploit this data set were proposed at
the beginning of the pandemic for representing biomedical
entities (eg, CORD-NER [55] and COVID-19 KG [56]) or
publications metadata (eg, COVID-19-Literature [57]). More
recently , CovidPubGraph [58] has provided a comprehensi ve
J Med Internet Res 2024 | vol. 26 | e52655 | p. 11 https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
(page number not for citation purposes)Invernici et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXand updated knowledge graph, which integrates information
from multiple sources, making results available through a
SPARQL end point. Finally , CovidGraph [59] exposed a
knowledge graph in the Neo4j browser; several external
ontologies are used to tag entities. The focus of these resources
is more on organization and semantic enrichment than on
exploration.
The goal of the TREC-CO VID initiati ve [60] was to establish
targeted retrie val tasks in response to the pandemic, to be shared
and collecti vely addressed by the community . Instead,
GRAPH-SEARCH aims to make the literature about COVID-19
searchable and explorable. This objecti ve is common to other
2 systems, LitCo vid and Outbreak.info; these support enhanced
keyword-based search, but they do not offer any graph-based
search support.
LitCo vid [1] was developed within the US National Institutes
of Health as a comprehensi ve resource of literature on
COVID-19 (372,221 publications at the time of writing),
updated regularly starting from PubMed. Publications are
manually screened to assess their relevance to COVID-19. They
are then categorized (eg, overvie w, disease mechanism,
transmission dynamics, treatment, case report, and epidemic
forecasting); assigned geographical locations; and annotated
with any drug or chemical-related information found in their
title and abstract, if applicable. The updated version [61]
introduced the long-co vid category, added annotations on
variants and vaccines, and supported with machine learning
algorithms the topic categorization (with a more updated model)
and entity recognition (with NER). The interf ace allows us to
apply filters on country , journal, drug, variant, and vaccine and
compose search strings combining AND, OR, and NOT
operators (ie, not documented); results are ranked by relevance,
based on the widely used BM25 ranking function of Lucene.
LitCo vid positi vely compares its performances to the classical
keyword search of PubMed (where annotations or tags are not
used).
Outbreak.info Research Library [2] is a project of the Hughes,
Su, Wu, and Andersen laboratories at Scripps Research. It offers
a searchable interf ace of COVID-19 publications
(complementing the content of LitCo vid integrating preprint
servers), together with clinical trials, data sets, protocols, and
other resources. The data structure upon which the search is
performed is supported by a schema; entities are connected by
links with various semantics. The visual interf ace allows the
use of some filters and keyword search; results are ranked byrelevance based on the Lucene Practical Scoring Function on
Elasticsearch (prioritizing the query normalization factor ,
coordination factor , term frequenc y, and inverse document
frequenc y).
Discussion
In this section, we discuss how the proposed graph query search
could be compared to other information extraction setups. For
this purpose, we focus on 2 UC queries, that is, the linear query
presented in UC3 (4 nodes in a linear pattern) and the red
subgraph shown in UC1 (a nonlinear 6 nodes query , expanded
with an additional node in GRAPH-SEARCH).
Comparison With COVID-19 Literatur e Sear ch
Systems
First, we considered running the UCs on the COVID-19
literature–dedicated search systems LitCo vid and Outbreak.info.
Both systems were queried using concept names corresponding
to UMLS terms in the nodes; unfortunately , they both suffer
from the limitations of Boolean search. Specif ically , if we search
with conjuncti ve clauses and exact search (eg, using
“Outpatients” AND “Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non Steroidal”
AND “Cyclooxygenase 2 Inhibitors” AND “COVID-19” for
UC3), no system returns any result. Dealing with exact search
is hard. For instance, with LitCo vid, the query “Cyclooxygenase
Inhibitors” produces 3 results, whereas the query
“Cyclooxygenase 2 Inhibitors” produces 5 results, although
apparently more restricti ve; instead, the query Cyclooxygenase
Inhibitors (no quotes), without exact search, produces 12,287
results (including all references referring to generic inhibitors).
Table 1reports the results of LitCo vid with conjuncti ve queries
but no exact matching, while a similar search is not supported
by Outbreak.info. In comparison, GRAPH-SEARCH reports
327 results for UC1 and 440 results for UC3. These outputs are
hardly comparable, mainly because with LitCo vid it is not
possible to build a unique graph-shaped query; therefore, results
of single conjuncti ve queries need to be evaluated one after the
other , whereas GRAPH-SEARCH aggre gates together the results
of several conjuncti ve chains; it also expands given concepts
with their acron yms (eg, “anti-inflammatory agents, non
steroidal” is also searched as “NSAIDs”). In addition,
GRAPH-SEARCH allows for the expansion of specif ic links
by adding new concepts (eg, “Up-Re gulation [Physiology]” in
UC1). No domain-specif ic system for COVID-19 supports
graph-based search, allowing a more insightful comparison.
J Med Internet Res 2024 | vol. 26 | e52655 | p. 12 https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
(page number not for citation purposes)Invernici et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXTable 1. Results of the evaluation of use case (UC) 1 (Figure 7) and UC3 queries when performed on the LitCo vid search interf ace, on the full-te xt
indexed MariaDB database, and on GRAPH-SEARCH.
Retrie ved pubs MariaDB, n Retrie ved pubs LitCo vid, n Query
UC1: GRAPH-SEARCH retrie ves 327 publications overall
11 316 (Severe (severity modif ier)) AND (Disease) AND (Associated With) AND (Gene
Expression) AND (High) AND (CCR2 gene)
12 52 (Severe (severity modif ier)) AND (Disease) AND (Associated With) AND (Gene
Expression) AND (High) AND (CCR2 gene)
AND Up-Re gulation (Physiology)
4 972 (Outpatients) AND (Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non Steroidal) AND (Cyclooxyge-
nase 2 Inhibitors)
UC 3: GRAPH-SEARCH retrie ves 440 publications overall
3 1714 (Outpatients) AND (Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non Steroidal) AND (COVID-19)
1 3018 (Outpatients) AND (Cyclooxygenase 2 Inhibitors) AND (COVID-19)
5 37322 (Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non Steroidal) AND (Cyclooxygenase 2 Inhibitors)
AND (COVID-19)
5 902 (Outpatients) AND (Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non Steroidal) AND (Cyclooxyge-
nase 2 Inhibitors) AND (COVID-19)
5 0 “Outpatients” AND “Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non Steroidal” AND “Cyclooxy-
genase 2 Inhibitors” AND “COVID-19”
Comparison With the Sear ch on Full-T ext Indexed
Corpora
We also attempted a comparison with search operations
performed on a baseline created by full-te xt indexing the
CORD-19 titles and abstracts. Specif ically , we used the full-te xt
indexing option of MariaDB, an open-source fork of MySQL
[19]. Typically , full-te xt indexes work well for regular text;
they build an index over specif ic words rather than the whole
text, and consequently , they show good performances for
searches of specif ic words. The same queries used on LitCo vid
and Outbreak.info were used on this setup: on MariaDB, we
used the “Natural language mode” documented on MariaDB
[62] and, thus, we remo ved the “AND” Boolean operators and
parentheses. To be part of the index, words must appear in <50%
of the documents to be considered potentially relevant and to
be used in searches (consequently , “COVID-19” and
“SARS-CoV -2” are not considered relevant). Results are
returned in descending order of relevance; limitations include
the exclusion of partial (or very short or long) words.
Notwithstanding our attempts, we note that the comparison of
the GRAPH-SEARCH approach with the full-te xt indexing
setup is very difficult for many reasons:
1.The databases upon which search is performed are built on
different assumptions (eg, to be part of the index, words
must appear in <50% of the documents; the co-occurrence
netw ork only includes entities that score high similarity
with ontology concepts and exclude relationships with a
negative NPMI).
2.In 1 case, we perform separate keyword search sessions
with separate results (with associated precision and recall
measures); in the other case, we retrie ve aggre gated results
(with summarized measures).3.On one side, the ranking produced is only on single query
result sets; on the other side, it is a global ranking.
The results are reported in Table 1; they must be read
considering all these aspects. Note that results achie ved with
keyword search are restricted to manipulating Boolean
expressions, adding, keywords and dropping keywords. On the
contrary , the results on GRAPH-SEARCH (327 and 440,
respecti vely for UC1 and UC3) are inspectable, with ranking,
ordering, filtering, and visualization options dedicated to the
explained chains of entities; using our search paradigm, users
can compose graph queries; more comple x topologies also allow
a stronger explainability of results.
Conclusions
GRAPH-SEARCH is the first search engine to propose the
exploration of COVID-19 scientif ic literature using visual graph
queries. GRAPH-SEARCH provides several unique features
such as the possibility to describe concepts using well-kno wn
ontologies, to establish co-occurrence relationships between
any 2 concepts of choice, to support search queries with concepts
proposed and ranked by the system, and to browse resulting
publications exploiting several visual and analytic measures.
The completeness and accurac y of the information captured in
the co-occurrence netw ork strictly depend on the advances of
the NER methods used during the steps of entity mining and
linking. Other systems have used expert curation (eg, LitCo vid)
or community-dri ven curation (eg, Outbreak.info). Although
expert curation can impro ve the search experience, it does not
properly scale; we opted for the exploitation of well-kno wn
biomedical ontologies such as UMLS and CIDO and
state-of-the-art natural language processing models used for
Entity Recognition in our data provision pipeline.
The ability of our system to extract results was evaluated,
attempting a comparison with existing published systems (eg,
J Med Internet Res 2024 | vol. 26 | e52655 | p. 13 https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
(page number not for citation purposes)Invernici et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXLitCo vid and Outbreak.info) and with full-te xt indexing search.
We recognize that comparisons between the results retrie ved
from these systems are not ideal, as it is very critical to compare
single search runs with a system where the result is built
progressi vely on the graph—considering a set of aspects
altogether (ie, how the netw ork was built and pruned, shortest
path computation, completion with additional nodes, and global
ranking of results).
Co-occurrence netw orks are conventionally used for analyzing
extensi ve text and big data. Common applications have involved
sentiment analysis [63] and detection of prevailing topics [64].
Here, each node is a word occurring in a set of user-generated
social media posts. Moreo ver, word-co-occurrence netw orks
are present in clinical applications, for example, Millington and
Luz [65] proposed to encode recordings of speech data used for
recognizing patients with Alzheimer and controls. In all such
cases, GRAPH-SEARCH may be used to find specif ic subgraphs
and propose completions of missing links.In this study , we have demonstrated the capability of
domain-specif ic (even inexact) graph query matching when
semantics is considered only for nodes; we are aware of the
limitations of this approach, which, at this stage, is considered
a modeling choice. In future work, we plan to extend our search
system to semantically rich knowledge graphs with both entities
and relationships, thereby enriching the expressi vity of graph
queries (also including the possibility to capture the semantics
of relationships, with state-of-the-art methods [66] or as we
already experimented in a previous study [67]). Then, we aim
to formalize the use of graph queries in the conte xt of graph
databases by studying the comple xity of graph search and
connecting it to classical theories of subgraph matching, shortest
path search, and conjuncti ve query processing.
We also aim to conduct extensi ve empirical studies to measure
user satisf action with systems such as GRAPH-SEARCH
analyzed along the 3 dimensions of usability , usefulness in
deepening their knowledge of certain connected topics, and
support of user’ s intentions in knowledge exploration.
Ackno wledgments
The authors would like to thank Luca Minotti for implementing the frontend of the GRAPH-SEARCH web application. This
research is supported by the PNRR-PE-AI FAIR project funded by the NextGenerationEU program.
Data Availability
The data processing pipeline is available as a Dock er image [68]. The GRAPH-SEARCH application is available [69] and
documented in the wiki [70].
Authors' Contrib utions
AB and SC concei ved the work; FI, AB, and SC jointly conceptualized and designed the frame work; FI implemented the pipelines
of data ingestion, netw ork construction, and graph query engine; FI and AB curated the user experience; AB drafted the manuscript;
FI and SC impro ved it; all authors revised the final version of the manuscript; and SC supervised the project.
Conflicts of Inter est
None declared.
Refer ences
1. Chen Q, Allot A, Lu Z. LitCo vid: an open database of COVID-19 literature. Nucleic Acids Res. Jan 08,
2021;49(D1):D1534-D1540. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa952 ] [Medline: 33166392 ]
2. Tsueng G, Mullen JL, Alkuzwen y M, Cano M, Rush B, Haag E, et al. Outbreak.info Research Library: a standardized,
searchable platform to disco ver and explore COVID-19 resources. Nat Methods. Apr 2023;20(4):536-540. [FREE Full
text] [doi: 10.1038/s41592-023-01770-w ] [Medline: 36823331 ]
3. Kejriw al M. Knowledge graphs and COVID-19: opportunities, challenges, and implementation. Harv ard Data Science
Review. Dec 1, 2020. URL: https://hdsr .mitpress.mit.edu/pub/xl0yk6ux/release/4 [accessed 2024-05-08]
4. Peng J, Xu D, Lee R, Xu S, Zhou Y, Wang K. Expediting knowledge acquisition by a web frame work for Knowledge
Graph Exploration and Visualization (KGEV): case studies on COVID-19 and Human Phenotype Ontology . BMC Med
Inform Decis Mak. Jun 02, 2022;22(Suppl 2):147. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s12911-022-01848-z ] [Medline: 35655307 ]
5. Ware C. Visual queries: the foundation of visual thinking. In: Tergan SO, Keller T, editors. Knowledge and Information
Visualization. Berlin, Heidelber g. Springer; 2005.
6. Cheerk oot-Jalim S, Khedo KK. Literature-based disco very approaches for evidence-based healthcare: a systematic review.
Health Technol (Berl). 2021;11(6):1205-1217. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1007/s12553-021-00605-y ] [Medline: 34722102 ]
7. Bodenreider O. The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS): integrating biomedical terminology . Nucleic Acids Res.
Jan 01, 2004;32(Database issue):D267-D270. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1093/nar/gkh061 ] [Medline: 14681409 ]
8. He Y, Yu H, Ong E, Wang Y, Liu Y, Huffman A, et al. CIDO, a community-based ontology for corona virus disease
knowledge and data integration, sharing, and analysis. Sci Data. Jun 12, 2020;7:181. [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1038/s41597-020-0523-6 ] [Medline: 32533075 ]
J Med Internet Res 2024 | vol. 26 | e52655 | p. 14 https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
(page number not for citation purposes)Invernici et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX9. Rindflesch TC, Kilicoglu H, Fiszman M, Rosemblat G, Shin D. Semantic MEDLINE: an advanced information management
application for biomedicine. Inf Serv Use. Sep 06, 2011;31(1-2):15-21. [doi: 10.3233/ISU-2011-0627 ]
10. Bernasconi A, Canak oglu A, Masseroli M, Ceri S. MET A-BASE: a novel architecture for large-scale genomic metadata
integration. IEEE/A CM Trans Comput Biol Bioinf. 2022;19(1):543-557. [doi: 10.1109/tcbb .2020.2998954 ]
11. Fernandez JD, Lenzerini M, Masseroli M, Venco F, Ceri S. Ontology-based search of genomic metadata. IEEE/A CM Trans
Comput Biol Bioinf. Mar 1, 2016;13(2):233-247. [doi: 10.1109/tcbb .2015.2495179 ]
12. Wang LL, Lo K, Chandrasekhar Y, Reas R, Yang J, Burdick D, et al. CORD-19: the COVID-19 Open Research Dataset.
arXiv. Preprint posted online on April 22, 2020. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.48550/arXi v.2004.10706 ]
13. Rose ME, Kitchin JR. pybliometrics: scriptable bibliometrics using a Python interf ace to Scopus. Softw areX. Jul
2019;10:100263. [doi: 10.1016/j.softx.2019.100263 ]
14. danielnsilv a / semanticscholar . GitHub . URL: https://github .com/danielnsilv a/semanticscholar [accessed 2023-11-15]
15. Church KW, Hanks P. Word association norms, mutual information, and lexicograph y. In: Proceedings of the 27th Annual
Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics. 1989. Presented at: ACL '89; June 26-29, 1989; Vancouv er, BC.
[doi: 10.3115/981623.981633 ]
16. Bouma G. Normalized (pointwise) mutual information in collocation extraction. In: Proceedings of Conferences of the
German Society for Computational Linguistics and Language Technology . 2009. Presented at: GSCL 2009; September 30,
2009; Potsdam, German y.
17. Cramér H. Mathematical Methods of Statistics. Princeton, NJ. Princeton University Press; 1999.
18. Logette E, Lorin C, Favreau C, Oshurk o E, Cogg an JS, Casale gno F, et al. A machine-generated view of the role of blood
glucose levels in the severity of COVID-19. Front Public Health. Jul 28, 2021;9:695139. [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.3389/fpubh.2021.695139 ] [Medline: 34395368 ]
19. MariaDB foundation homepage. MariaDB Foundation. URL: https://mariadb .org/[accessed 2023-11-15]
20. Neo4j graph database and analytics. Neo4j. URL: https://neo4j.com/ [accessed 2023-11-15]
21. Neumann M, King D, Beltagy I, Ammar W. ScispaCy: fast and robust models for biomedical natural language processing.
In: Proceedings of the 18th BioNLP Workshop and Shared Task. 2019. Presented at: BioNLP 2019; August 1, 2019;
Florence, Italy. [doi: 10.18653/v1/w19-5034 ]
22. neo4j / graph-data-science. GitHub . URL: https://github .com/neo4j/graph-data-science [accessed 2023-11-15]
23. Pairo-Castineira E, Clohise y S, Klaric L, Bretherick AD, Rawlik K, Pasko D, GenOMICC Investig ators, ISARIC4C
Investig ators, COVID-19 Human Genetics Initiati ve, 23andMe Investig ators, BRA COVID Investig ators, Gen-CO VID
Investig ators, et al. Genetic mechanisms of critical illness in COVID-19. Nature. Mar 2021;591(7848):92-98. [doi:
10.1038/s41586-020-03065-y ] [Medline: 33307546 ]
24. Teixeira PC, Dorneles GP, Santana Filho PC, da Silva IM, Schipper LL, Postig a IA, et al. Increased LPS levels coexist
with systemic inflammation and result in monoc yte activation in severe COVID-19 patients. Int Immunopharmacol. Nov
2021;100:108125. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2021.108125 ] [Medline: 34543980 ]
25. Kratochvil MJ, Kaber G, Demirdjian S, Cai PC, Burgener EB, Nagy N, Stanford COVID-19 Biobank Study Group, et al.
Biochemical, bioph ysical, and immunological characterization of respiratory secretions in severe SARS-CoV -2 infections.
JCI Insight. Jun 22, 2022;7(12):e152629. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.152629 ] [Medline: 35730564 ]
26. Perico N, Cortino vis M, Suter F, Remuzzi G. Home as the new frontier for the treatment of COVID-19: the case for
anti-inflammatory agents. Lancet Infect Dis. Jan 2023;23(1):e22-e33. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(22)00433-9 ]
[Medline: 36030796 ]
27. Consolaro E, Suter F, Rubis N, Pedroni S, Moroni C, Pastò E, et al. A home-treatment algorithm based on anti-inflammatory
drugs to prevent hospitalization of patients with early COVID-19: a matched-cohort study (COVER 2). Front Med (Lausanne).
Apr 22, 2022;9:785785. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.785785 ] [Medline: 35530041 ]
28. Popo vych V, Koshel I, Malof iichuk A, Pyletska L, Semeniuk A, Filippo va O, et al. A randomized, open-label, multicenter ,
comparati ve study of therapeutic efficacy, safety and tolerability of BNO 1030 extract, containing marshmallo w root,
chamomile flowers, horsetail herb, walnut leaves, yarro w herb, oak bark, dandelion herb in the treatment of acute non-bacterial
tonsillitis in children aged 6 to 18 years. Am J Otolaryngol. 2019;40(2):265-273. [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1016/j.amjoto.2018.10.012 ] [Medline: 30554882 ]
29. Sava M, Sommer G, Daik eler T, Woischnig AK, Martinez AE, Leuzinger K, et al. Ninety-day outcome of patients with
severe COVID-19 treated with tocilizumab - a single centre cohort study . Swiss Med Wkly . Aug 10, 2021;151:w20550.
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.4414/smw .2021.20550 ] [Medline: 34375986 ]
30. Patel SK, Juno JA, Lee WS, Wragg KM, Hogarth PM, Kent SJ, et al. Plasma ACE2 activity is persistently elevated following
SARS-CoV -2 infection: implications for COVID-19 pathogenesis and consequences. Eur Respir J. May 13,
2021;57(5):2003730. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1183/13993003.03730-2020 ] [Medline: 33479113 ]
31. Yamaguchi T, Hoshizaki M, Minato T, Nirasa wa S, Asaka M, Niiyama M, et al. ACE2-lik e carboxypeptidase B38-CAP
protects from SARS-CoV -2-induced lung injury . Nat Commun. Nov 23, 2021;12(1):6791. [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1038/s41467-021-27097-8 ] [Medline: 34815389 ]
J Med Internet Res 2024 | vol. 26 | e52655 | p. 15 https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
(page number not for citation purposes)Invernici et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX32. Gupta S, Mitra A. Challenge of post-CO VID era: management of cardio vascular complications in asymptomatic carriers
of SARS-CoV -2. Heart Fail Rev. Jan 2022;27(1):239-249. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1007/s10741-021-10076-y ] [Medline:
33426593 ]
33. Gargano JW, Wallace M, Hadler SC, Langle y G, Su JR, Oster ME, et al. Use of mRN A COVID-19 vaccine after reports
of myocarditis among vaccine recipients: update from the advisory committee on immunization practices - United States,
June 2021. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. Jul 09, 2021;70(27):977-982. [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.15585/mmwr .mm7027e2 ] [Medline: 34237049 ]
34. Oster ME, Shay DK, Su JR, Gee J, Creech CB, Broder KR, et al. Myocarditis cases reported after mRN A-based COVID-19
vaccination in the US from December 2020 to August 2021. JAMA. Jan 25, 2022;327(4):331-340. [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1001/jama.2021.24110 ] [Medline: 35076665 ]
35. Lee E, Kim K, Kim M, Yang H, Yum HY, Lee M, et al. Adverse reactions to corona virus disease 2019 vaccines in children
and adolescents. Aller gy Asthma Respir Dis. Jan 2022;10(1):9-14. [doi: 10.4168/aard.2022.10.1.9 ]
36. Zhu Y, Qin L, Yu JX, Cheng H. Finding top-k similar graphs in graph databases. In: Proceedings of the 15th International
Conference on Extending Database Technology . 2012. Presented at: EDBT '12; March 27-30, 2012; Berlin, German y. [doi:
10.1145/2247596.2247650 ]
37. Nikolentzos G, Meladianos P, Rousseau F, Stavrakas Y, Vazirgiannis M. Shortest-path graph kernels for document similarity .
In: Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 2017. Presented at: EMNLP
2017; September 9-11, 2017; Copenhagen, Denmark. [doi: 10.18653/v1/d17-1202 ]
38. Han J, Sarica S, Shi F, Luo J. Semantic netw orks for engineering design: state of the art and future directions. J Mech Des.
Feb 2022;144(2):020802. [doi: 10.1115/1.4052148 ]
39. Shi F, Chen L, Han J, Childs P. A data-dri ven text mining and semantic netw ork analysis for design information retrie val.
J Mech Des. Nov 2017;139(11):111402. [doi: 10.1115/1.4037649 ]
40. Wang JZ, Zhang Y, Dong L, Li L, Srimani PK, Yu PS. G-Bean: an ontology-graph based web tool for biomedical literature
retrie val. BMC Bioinform. Nov 6, 2014;15(Suppl 12):S1. [doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-15-s12-s1 ]
41. Taduri S, Law KH, Kesan JP, Sriram RD. Utilization of bio-ontologies for enhancing patent information retrie val. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE 43rd Annual Computer Softw are and Applications Conference. 2019. Presented at: COMPSA C
2019; July 15-19, 2019; Milwaukee, WI. [doi: 10.1109/compsac.2019.10189 ]
42. Dinh D, Tamine L. Identif ication of concept domains and its application in biomedical information retrie val. Inf Syst E
Bus Manage. Sep 20, 2014;13:647-672. [doi: 10.1007/s10257-014-0259-y ]
43. Gao S, Kotevska O, Sorokine A, Christian JB. A pre-training and self-training approach for biomedical named entity
recognition. PLoS One. Feb 9, 2021;16(2):e0246310. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0246310 ] [Medline:
33561139 ]
44. Wang X, Huang Z, van Harmelen F. Ontology-based semantic similarity approach for biomedical dataset retrie val. In:
Proceedings of the Health Information Science. 2020. Presented at: HIS 2020; October 20-23, 2020; Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. [doi: 10.1177/0002764289032005003 ]
45. Mara ver P, Armañanzas R, Gillette TA, Ascoli GA. PaperBot: open-source web-based search and metadata organization
of scientif ic literature. BMC Bioinformatics. Jan 24, 2019;20(1):50. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s12859-019-2613-z ]
[Medline: 30678631 ]
46. Díaz-Galiano MC, Martín-V aldivia MT, Ureña-López LA. Query expansion with a medical ontology to impro ve a multimodal
information retrie val system. Comput Biol Med. Apr 2009;39(4):396-403. [doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2009.01.012 ]
[Medline: 19268924 ]
47. Dong L, Srimani PK, Wang JZ. Ontology graph based query expansion for biomedical information retrie val. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine. 2011. Presented at: BIBM 2011; November
12-15, 2011; Atlanta, GA. [doi: 10.1109/bibm.2011.15 ]
48. Mohan S, Li D. MedMentions: a large biomedical corpus annotated with UMLS concepts. arXiv. Preprint posted online
on February 25, 2019. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.24432/C5G59C ]
49. Basaldella M, Liu F, Share ghi E, Collier N. COMET A: a corpus for medical entity linking in the social media. In: Proceedings
of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 2020. Presented at: EMNLP 2020; November
16-20, 2020; Online. [doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.253 ]
50. Fei H, Ren Y, Zhang Y, Ji D, Liang X. Enriching conte xtualized language model from knowledge graph for biomedical
information extraction. Brief Bioinform. May 20, 2021;22(3):bbaa110. [doi: 10.1093/bib/bbaa110 ] [Medline: 32591802 ]
51. Kalyan KS, Rajasekharan A, Sangeetha S. AMMU: a survey of transformer -based biomedical pretrained language models.
J Biomed Inform. Feb 2022;126:103982. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2021.103982 ] [Medline: 34974190 ]
52. Welcome to the COVID-19 portfolio. National Institute for Health Office of Portfolio Analysis. URL: https://icite.od.nih.go v/
covid19/search/ [accessed 2023-11-15]
53. Human corona viruses data initiati ve. Lens. URL: https://about.lens.or g/covid-19/ [accessed 2023-11-15]
54. Dagdelen J, Trewartha A, Huo H, Fei Y, He T, Cruse K, et al. COVIDScholar: an automated COVID-19 research aggre gation
and analysis platform. PLoS One. Feb 1, 2023;18(2):e0281147. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0281147 ]
[Medline: 36724184 ]
J Med Internet Res 2024 | vol. 26 | e52655 | p. 16 https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
(page number not for citation purposes)Invernici et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX55. Wang X, Song X, Li B, Guan Y, Han J. Comprehensi ve named entity recognition on CORD-19 with distant or weak
supervision. arXiv. Preprint posted online on March 27, 2020. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.48550/arXi v.2003.12218 ]
56. Chen C, Ross KE, Gavali S, Cowart JE, Wu CH. COVID-19 Knowledge Graph from semantic integration of biomedical
literature and databases. Bioinformatics. Dec 07, 2021;37(23):4597-4598. [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1093/bioinformatics/btab694 ] [Medline: 34613368 ]
57. Steenwinck el B, Vandewiele G, Rausch I, Heyvaert P, Taelman R, Colpaert P, et al. Facilitating the analysis of COVID-19
literature through a knowledge graph. In: Proceedings of the 19th International Semantic Web Conference. 2020. Presented
at: ISWC 2020; November 2-6, 2020; Athens, Greece. [doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-62466-8_22 ]
58. Pestryak ova S, Vollmers D, Sherif MA, Heindorf S, Saleem M, Moussallem D, et al. COVIDPUBGRAPH: a FAIR
knowledge graph of COVID-19 publications. Sci Data. Jul 08, 2022;9(1):389. [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1038/s41597-022-01298-2 ] [Medline: 35803947 ]
59. Gütebier L, Bleimehl T, Henk el R, Munro J, Müller S, Morgner A, et al. CovidGraph: a graph to fight COVID-19.
Bioinformatics. Oct 14, 2022;38(20):4843-4845. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btac592 ] [Medline: 36040169 ]
60. Roberts K, Alam T, Bedrick S, Demner -Fushman D, Lo K, Soborof f I, et al. Searching for scientif ic evidence in a pandemic:
an overvie w of TREC-CO VID. J Biomed Inform. Sep 2021;121:103865. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2021.103865 ]
[Medline: 34245913 ]
61. Chen Q, Allot A, Leaman R, Wei CH, Aghaarabi E, Guerrerio JJ, et al. LitCo vid in 2022: an information resource for the
COVID-19 literature. Nucleic Acids Res. Jan 06, 2023;51(D1):D1512-D1518. [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac1005 ]
[Medline: 36350613 ]
62. Full-te xt index overvie w. MariaDB. URL: https://mariadb .com/kb/en/full-te xt-inde x-overvie w/[accessed 2023-11-15]
63. Fudolig MI, Alshaabi T, Arnold MV, Danforth CM, Dodds PS. Sentiment and structure in word co-occurrence netw orks
on Twitter . Appl Netw Sci. Feb 14, 2022;7(1):1-27. [doi: 10.1007/s1109-022-00446-2 ]
64. Segev E. Textual netw ork analysis: detecting prevailing themes and biases in international news and social media. Sociol
Compass. Feb 14, 2020;14(4):e12779. [doi: 10.1111/soc4.12779 ]
65. Millington T, Luz S. Analysis and classif ication of word co-occurrence netw orks from Alzheimer’ s patients and controls.
Front Comput Sci. Apr 29, 2021;3:1-12. [doi: 10.3389/fcomp.2021.649508 ]
66. Singhal A, Simmons M, Lu Z. Text mining genotype-phenotype relationships from biomedical literature for database
curation and precision medicine. PLoS Comput Biol. Nov 30, 2016;12(11):e1005017. [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005017 ] [Medline: 27902695 ]
67. Serna García G, Al Khalaf R, Invernici F, Ceri S, Bernasconi A. CoVEf fect: interacti ve system for mining the effects of
SARS-CoV -2 mutations and variants based on deep learning. Gigascience. Dec 28, 2022;12:giad036. [FREE Full text]
[doi: 10.1093/gig ascience/giad036 ] [Medline: 37222749 ]
68. frinve/graph-search. Dock er. URL: https://hub .dock er.com/r/frin ve/graph-search [accessed 2024-05-14]
69. GRAPH-SEARCH homepage. GRAPH-SEARCH. URL: http://geco.deib .polimi.it/graph-search/ [accessed 2024-05-14]
70. FrInve / graph-search. GitHub . URL: https://github .com/FrIn ve/graph-search/wiki/ [accessed 2024-05-14]
Abbreviations
ACE2: angiotensin-con verting enzyme 2
API: application programming interf ace
CIDO: Corona virus Infectious Disease Ontology
CORD-19: COVID-19 Open Research Dataset
NER: named entity recognition
NPMI: normalized pointwise mutual information
NSAID: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
UC: use case
UMLS: Unified Medical Language System
Edited by G Tsafnat; submitted 26.11.23; peer-reviewed by S Hume , A Rasool; comments to author 28.02.24; revised version received
06.03.24; accepted 30.03.24; published 30.05.24
Please cite as:
Invernici F, Bernasconi A, Ceri S
Searching COVID-19 Clinical Resear ch Using Graph Queries: Algorithm Development and Validation
J Med Internet Res 2024;26:e52655
URL: https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
doi: 10.2196/52655
PMID: 38814687
J Med Internet Res 2024 | vol. 26 | e52655 | p. 17 https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
(page number not for citation purposes)Invernici et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX©Francesco Invernici, Anna Bernasconi, Stefano Ceri. Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet Research
(https://www .jmir.org), 30.05.2024. This is an open-access article distrib uted under the terms of the Creati ve Commons Attrib ution
License (https://creati vecommons.or g/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distrib ution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work, first published in the Journal of Medical Internet Research, is properly cited. The complete
bibliographic information, a link to the original publication on https://www .jmir.org/, as well as this copyright and license
information must be included.
J Med Internet Res 2024 | vol. 26 | e52655 | p. 18 https://www .jmir.org/2024/1/e52655
(page number not for citation purposes)Invernici et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX