Title: Stem Cell Therapy for Alzheimer's Disease
Abstract:   The loss of neuronal cells in the central nervous system may happen in
numerous neurodegenerative illnesses. Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is an intricate,
irreversible, dynamic neurodegenerative sickness. It is the main source of
age-related dementia, influencing roughly 5.3 million individuals in the United
States alone. Promotion is a typical feeble ailment in individuals more than 65
years, bringing on disability described by decrease in memory, failure to learn
and do every day exercises, intellectual weakness and influences the personal
satisfaction of patients. Pathologic qualities of AD are an irregular
development of specific proteins called Beta-amyloid "plaques" and Tau
"Tangles" in the mind. Notwithstanding, current treatments against AD are just
to calm manifestations and palliative yet are not the cure and a few promising
medications competitors have fizzled in late clinical trials. There is
consequently a critical need to enhance our comprehension for pathogenesis of
this sickness, making new and creative prescient models with powerful
treatments. As of late, stem cell treatment has been appeared to have a
potential way to deal with different illnesses, including neurodegenerative
disorders. In light of the far reaching nature of AD pathology, stem cell
substitution procedures have been seen as an extraordinarily difficult and
impossible treatment approach. Stem Cell may likewise offer an effective new
way to deal with model and concentrate AD. Patient derived induced Pluripotent
Stem Cells (iPSCs), for instance, may propel our comprehension of disease
mechanism. In this review we will examine the capability of stem cells to help
in these testing tries.

Full Text: Stem Cell Therapy for Alzheimer's Disease  Patel, Ankur P.¹, Joshi, Grishma N.², and Ugile, Rupali P.³ ¹ Biomedical Sciences Department, Specialization in Immunology, C. W. Post College, Long Island University, NY.; Email: ankur.patel2@my.liu.edu. ² Biomedical Sciences Department, Specialization in Cancer Biology, C. W. Post College, Long Island University, NY.; Email: grishmabahen.joshi@my.liu.edu. ³ Biomedical Sciences Department, Specialization in Microbiology, C. W. Post College, Long Island University, NY.; Email:rupali.ugile@my.liu.edu.  To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1(212)748-9329, Email: ankur.patel2@my.liu.edu.  Abstract The	loss	of	neuronal	cells	in	the	central	nervous	system	may	happen	in	numerous	neurodegenerative	illnesses.	Alzheimer's	Disease	(AD)	is	an	intricate,	irreversible,	dynamic	neurodegenerative	sickness.	It	is	the	main	source	of	age-related	dementia,	influencing	roughly	5.3	million	individuals	in	the	United	States	alone.	Promotion	is	a	typical	feeble	ailment	in	individuals	more	than	65	years,	bringing	on	disability	described	by	decrease	in	memory,	failure	to	learn	and	do	every	day	exercises,	intellectual	weakness	and	influences	the	personal	satisfaction	of	patients.	Pathologic	qualities	of	AD	are	an	irregular	development	of	specific	proteins	called	Beta-amyloid	"plaques"	and	Tau	"Tangles"	in	the	mind.	Notwithstanding,	current	treatments	against	AD	are	just	to	calm	manifestations	and	palliative	yet	are	not	the	cure	and	a	few	promising	medications	competitors	have	fizzled	in	late	clinical	trials.	There	is	consequently	a	critical	need	to	enhance	our	comprehension	for	pathogenesis	of	this	sickness,	making	new	and	creative	prescient	models	with	powerful	treatments.	As	of	late,	stem	cell	treatment	has	been	appeared	to	have	a	potential	way	to	deal	with	different	illnesses,	including	neurodegenerative	disorders.	In	light	of	the	far	reaching	nature	of	AD	pathology,	stem	cell	substitution	procedures	have	been	seen	as	an	extraordinarily	difficult	and	impossible	treatment	approach.	Stem	Cell	may	likewise	offer	an	effective	new	way	to	deal	with	model	and	concentrate	AD.	Patient	derived	induced	Pluripotent	Stem	Cells	(iPSCs),	for	instance,	may	propel	our	comprehension	of	disease	mechanism.	In	this	review	we	will	examine	the	capability	of	stem	cells	to	help	in	these	testing	tries.		Keywords:		Alzheimer’s	disease,	stem	cell	therapy,	oxidative	stress,	induced	pluripotent	stem	cells,	transplantation,	and	neurogenesis			Introduction Alzheimer's	Disease	(AD),	the	most	widely	recognized	type	of	age	related	dementia,	which	is	the	real	reason	for	incapacity	among	the	more	seasoned	individuals	around	the	world.	Promotion	step	by	step	wrecks	the	influenced	patient’s	memory	and	capacity	to	learn	and	reason	(after	the	age	of	~65).	They	show	a	hindered	capacity	to	grasp	or	utilize	words,	poor	coordination,	absence	of	judgment	and	basic	leadership	capacity,	disarray,	state	of	mind	swings	and	extra	minutes	turns	out	to	be	comprehensively	severe	[1][2].	It	is	the	most	widely	recognized	sort	of	dementia,	at	present	influencing	35.6	million	individuals	around	the	world,	which	is	an	assume	that	is	relied	upon	to	triple	by	2050	[3].	By	and	large,	AD	is	ordered	in	two	sorts,	i.e.	familial	AD	and	sporadic	AD.	The	transformation	of	three	qualities:	The	amyloid	antecedent	protein	(APP),	presenilin-1	(PS-1)	and	presenilin-2	(PS-2)	are	key	changes	present	in	Familial	AD	[4].	Sporadic	AD	is	the	aftereffect	of	ecological	elements	and	danger	qualities,	with	apolipoprotein	(ApoE)	supposedly	the	most	vital	[5].		The	boundless	loss	of	neurons	and	neurotransmitters	that	happens	in	AD	seems,	by	all	accounts,	to	be	brought	on	by	the	collection	of	dangerous	types	of	the	"beta-amyloid"	(Aβ)	plaques,	neurofibrillary	tangles	(NFT)	and	neurodegeneration,	speaking	to	obsessive	attributes.	Aβ	peptides	are	observed	to	be	the	fundamental	constituents	of	senile	plaques,	and	AB	fibrils	from	pores	in	neurons	have	been	appeared	to	prompt	calcium	influx	and	neuronal	passing	[6].	NFT	comprises	of	neurofibrillary	protein	aggregates,	shaped	as	irregular	hyper	phosphorylation	of	"tau"	protein,	which	is	one	of	the	microtubule-related	proteins	[7].	Moreover,	microglia	have	been	accounted	for	to	assume	an	imperative	part	in	the	safe	protection	arrangement	of	the	central	nervous	system	(CNS).	Microglia	initiation	and	the	arrival	of	related	incendiary	elements	have	been	accounted	for	to	add	to	unending	neurodegenerative	issue	in	AD	[8].	All	the	more	as	of	late,	stem	cell	treatment	has	been	seen	as	a	potential	way	to	deal	with	its	treatment.	In	this	review,	we	concentrate	on	Stem	cell	treatments	for	AD	Pathogenesis of AD  The	definite	reason	for	AD	is	not	surely	understood.	Considering	the	commonness	and	poor	visualization	of	AD,	there	has	been	an	examination	need	in	creating	infection	models	for	concentrating	on	pathogenicity	and	to	help	being	developed	of	restorative	methodologies.	In	United	States	starting	2012,	1	out	of	8	senior	nationals	(13%)	are	experiencing	AD,	making	it	the	6th	most	regular	reason	for	death.	More	than	5.4	million	AD	patients	are	right	now	accepting	restorative	consideration	in	the	USA	and	they	bring	about	consideration	costs	that	are	as	high	as	$200	billion	a	year	[9].	Advertisement	is	normally	portrayed	by	a	steady	decrease	of	memory,	dialect,	and	psychological	capacity.					Figure 1- Healthy neurons  Figure 2- Neurons affected by Alzheimer's disease   P.C. (Figure 1 and 2): Alzheimer’s disease: how could stem cells help? http://www.eurostemcell.org/factsheet/alzheimer’s-disease-how-could-stem-cells-help.	 The	two	pathological	trademarks	known	not	in	the	patient's	cerebrum,	be	that	as	it	may,	has	an	indistinct	truth	of	which	of	these	seems	first	and/or	is	primarily	in	charge	of	the	illness'	advancement	are,	senile	plaques	and	neurofibrillary	tangles	(NFT)	[10,11].	Senile	plaques	are	stores	of	an	unmistakable	protein	pieces	called	beta-amyloid	(Aβ),	which	causes	neuronal	cytotoxicity,	and	neurofibrillary	tangles	are	irregular	structures	that	are	framed	by	changes	in	the	tau	protein	inside	the	nerve	cells.	The nerve cells shrink and die progressively in the brain of Alzheimer’s patients. Such	neuronal	cell	demise	happens	principally,	in	areas	in	charge	of	the	memory,	yet	it	at	last	spreads	to	the	whole	cerebrum.	Diminish	acetylcholine,	which	is	a	neurotransmitter	that	is	included	in	the	intracellular	flagging	and	insufficiency	in	the	creation	of	different	neurotransmitters,	for	example,	somatostatin,	serotonin	and	norepinephrine	results	in	debilitated	neuronal	systems	administration	in	Alzheimer's	patients	[12].	Total	of	Aβ	saw	in	the	Familial	Alzheimer's	Disease	(FAD)	come’s	about	by	quality	change	of	the	Aβ	precursor	protein,	which	is	the	segment	of	the	senile	plaques.	The	transentorhinal	cortex	of	the	mind	is	the	spot	where	ailment	begins	of	shows	and	dynamically	spreads	to	the	entorhinal	cortex,	the	hippocampus,	and	the	cerebral	cortex.	With	emotional	neuronal	cell	passing,	memory	misfortune	and	intellectual	
brokenness	alongside	movement	of	dementia,	additionally	prompts	demise	of	the	patient	[13-15].	General Treatment for AD Alzheimer's	Disease	(AD)	may	come	about	because	of	the	collection	of	amyloid-beta	(Aβ)	peptides	in	the	cerebrum.	The	Cysteine	Protease	family	based	Cathepsin	B	(CatB)	corrupts	peptides	and	proteins	and	is	connected	with	amyloid	plaques	in	a	relative	constrained	way	in	AD	brains	through	endocytosis	or	phagocytosis.	So	inhibitors	of	cathepsin	B	might	be	considered	as	restorative	operators	to	diminish	Aβ	in	AD	[16].	Neprilysin	(Nep)	has	been	as	of	late	recognized	as	a	noteworthy	extracellular	Aβ	corrupting	protein	in	the	cerebrum	and	proposes	that	quality	exchange	methodologies	may	have	potential	for	the	advancement	of	option	treatments	for	Alzheimer's	Disease	[17].	Other	pharmacological	alternatives	are	without	further	ado	accessible	for	the	symptomatic	treatment	of	AD	which	incorporates	Acetylcholinesterase	inhibitors	(AChEIs)	and	memantine,	a	N-methyl-d-aspartic	acid	antagonist,	utilized	as	a	joined	treatment	[18].	High	plasma	levels	of	vitamin	E	are	connected	with	a	diminished	danger	of	AD	in	cutting	edge	age,	going	about	as	a	cell	reinforcement,	securing	against	lipid	peroxidation	[19].	Stem Cell Treatment for AD Foundational	stem	cells	are	characterized	as	cells	that	be	able	to	recharge	themselves	ceaselessly	and	have	pluripotent	capacity	to	separate	into	numerous	cell	sorts.	Two	sorts	of	mammalian	pluripotent	stem	cells,	embryonic	stem	cells	(ESCs)	got	from	the	internal	cell	mass	of	blastocysts	and	embryonic	germ	cells	(EGCs)	acquired	from	post	implantation	developing	lives,	have	been	distinguished,	and	these	foundational	stem	cells	offer	ascent	to	different	organs	and	tissues.	As	of	late,	there	has	been	an	energizing	improvement	in	era	of	another	class	of	pluripotent	foundational	stem	cells,	induced	pluripotent	stem	cells	(iPS	cells),	from	grown-up	physical	cells.	Notwithstanding	ESCs	and	iPS	cells,	tissue-particular	stem	cells	could	be	separated	from	different	tissues	of	more	progressed	formative	stages,	for	example,	hematopoietic	stem	cells,	bone	marrow	mesenchymal	stem	cells	(BMMSCs),	adipose-tissue	derived	stem	cells,	amniotic	liquid	stem	cells,	and	neural	stem	cells	[20].		Degeneration	or	brokenness	of	medial	ganglionic	prominence	(MGE)	descendants	is	regularly	connected	with	learning	and	memory	disorders.		Progeny	of	the	MGE-like	progenitors,	especially	basal	forebrain	cholinergic	neurons	(BFCNs),	may	encourage	the	advancement	of	cell	treatments	for	AD	[21].	Stem	Cell	transplantation	increased	brain	derived	neurotropic	factors	(BDNF)	and	nerve	development	calculate	and	restored	cholinergic	neuronal	trustworthiness	[22].	The	extracellular	ligand,	Wnt,	and	its	receptors	are	included	in	sign	transduction	and	assume	a	critical	part	in	pivot	arrangement	and	neural	advancement.	In	AD,	a	diminishing	of	the	intracellular	Wnt	effector,	β-catenin,	has	been	connected	to	amyloid-β-peptide-impelled	neurotoxicity.	Secreted	frizzled-related	proteins	(sFRPs),	which	are	group	of	Wnt	mediators,	may	have	potential	ramifications	in	treatment	of	AD	in	study	models	[23].	Transplantation	of	Adipose-determined	mesenchymal	stem	cells	(ADMSCs)	enhances	intellectual	capacity	by	expanding	acetylcholine	synthesis	and	restoring	neuronal	integrity.	Bone	marrow	Mesenchymal	stem	cells	are	likewise	critical	to	expel	Aβ	plaques	from	the	hippocampus	and	to	diminish	Aβ	stores	through	the	enactment	of	endogenous	microglia	in	an	affected	AD	mouse	model.		Embryonic		stem	cells	are	self-recharging	totipotent	cells	that	can	separate	into	neuron	progenitor	cells	and	are	transplanted	in	AD	creature	models	and	it	can	bring	about	a	treatment	of	AD.	Human	neural	stem	cells	(HNSCs)	transplanted	into	aged	rat	brains	separated	into	neural	cells	and	fundamentally	enhanced	the	psychological	elements	of	the	animals,	showing	that	HNSCs	might	be	a	promising	competitor	for	cell-substitution	treatments	for	neurodegenerative	diseases	including	Alzheimer's	disease	(AD).	RNA	obstruction	of	APP	or	decrease	of	APP	levels	in	the	cerebrum	can	essentially	diminish	glial	separation	of	stem	cells	and	might	be	helpful	in	promoting	neurogenesis	after	stem	cell	transplantation	[24].		Presence	of	multipotent	neural	stem	cells	(NSCs)	in	creating	or	grown-up	mammalian	cerebrum	with	properties	of	inconclusive	development	and	multipotent	potential	to	separate	into	three	noteworthy	CNS	cell	sorts,	neurons,	astrocytes,	and	oligodendrocytes.	Nerve	Growth	factor	(NGF)	counteracts	neuronal	demise	and	enhances	memory	in	creature	models	of	maturing,	excitotoxicity,	and	amyloid	lethality,	proposing	that	NGF	might	be	utilized	for	treating	neuronal	degeneration	and	cell	passing	in	AD.	Quality	treatment	is	valuable	in	conveyance	of	NGF	into	the	cerebrum.	Stem	cells	can	be	hereditarily	altered	to	convey	new	qualities	and	have	high	transient	limit	after	transplantation	in	mind	and	they	could	be	utilized	as	a	part	of	spot	of	fibroblasts	that	are	known	for	their	fixed	nature	taking	after	transplantation	for	conveyance	of	NGF	to	counteract	degeneration	of	basal	forebrain	cholinergic	neurons	[25].		Undifferentiated	cell	has	helpful	impacts	in	any	case;	further	studies	are	expected	to	decide	the	proper	conditions	to	enhance	the	remedial	impacts	for	AD	pathology.	Understanding the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) using Induced Pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) The	iPSCs	model	framework	got	from	familial	and	additionally	sporadic	AD	patients	could	be	an	instrument	to	know	the	atomic	premise	of	sporadic	AD	furthermore	turned	out	to	be	compelling	in	testing	the	medication	proficiency	for	AD.	Speculation	expresses	the	helpfulness	of	iPSCs	as	these	cells	could	be	focused	by	utilizing	propelled	quality	altering	procedures	as	a	part	of	familial	known	change	and	could	be	utilized	for	further	cell	transplantation	treatments	[26].	The	study	exhibits	the	dermal	fibroblast	taken	from	the	patient	determined	to	have	late	stage	AD	and	reinvented	to	iPSCs.	These	iPSCs	lines	indicated	pluripotent	properties	which	are	like	human	embryonic	foundational	stem	cells	which	could	be	separated	to	neuronal	cells	in	vitro.	These	neuronal	cells	have	demonstrated	the	AD	phenotype	and	articulation	of	p-tau	proteins,	up	control	of	GSK3B	protein	and	its	phosphorylation	as	which	was	not	seen	in	parental	dermal	cells.	Various	qualities	are	uncovered	by	neuronal	separation	try	different	things	with	AD-iPSCs	line	[27,	28].	The	study	could	demonstrate	that	the	quality	direction	units	and	subunits	of	proteasome	complex	are	influenced	in	neurons	got	from	AD	patients	[27].		The	academic	study	by	Yagiet.	al.	additionally	produced	iPSCs	from	patient	with	familial	AD	where	changes	in	Presenilin1	and	Presenilin2	were	watched	[29].	Which	results	to	frame	an	off	base	cleavage	and	affidavit	of	amyloid-β	protein	which	is	considered	to	shape	plaque	[30,	31].	Hurdles and limitation in stem cell therapy in Alzheimer's disease There	are	impediments	to	know	the	basic	genomic	pathology	because	of	some	moral	issues	in	accessibility	of	suitable	neuronal	cells	from	AD	patients.	Secondly	utilizing	iPSCs	on	substantial	scale	requires	various	propelled	strategies	and	expense	to	deliver	iPSCs	on	huge	scale	[32].		To	create	iPSCs	from	substantial	cells,	reconstructing	variables	must	be	included	by	two	techniques	utilizing	incorporating	and	non-coordinating	framework.	These	strategies	are	turned	out	to	be	exceptionally	productive	however	it	has	the	danger	of	bringing	about	disease	[33].	There	are	couple	of	mistakes	in	use	of	iPSCs	in	people	as	the	creature	utilized	as	an	ailment	testing	model	can't	mimic	human	genetic	cells	and	microenvironment	precisely.	In	addition,	the	delayed	utilization	of	normal	immunosuppressant	drugs	in	matured	mice	utilized	for	study	causes	dangerous	symptoms	to	the	mice	which	may	modify	the	pathology	identified	with	AD.	In	this	manner	it	influences	the	translations	likewise	[34,	35].		As	there	are	different	neuronal	frameworks	and	neuro-phenotypes	are	influenced	in	AD,	it	has	gotten	to	be	trying	in	making	cell	substitution	approach.	However,	the	study	in	mouse	model	may	give	important	useful	advantages	in	undifferentiated	cell	treatment	if	approach	towards	the	exploration	could	be	changed	by	utilizing	AD	transgenic	model	with	inept	foundation	yet	such	model	has	not	been	distributed	yet	[36].	Likewise,	if	stem	cells	gave	Intravenously	may	likewise	block	blood	vessels.	Numerous	inquiries	of	fundamental	science	stay’s	unanswered	as	what	number	of	cell	need	to	convey	and	where	and	how	regularly.	Future Direction Immunotherapy for AD Active and Passive Immunization With	different	hostile	to	Aβ	systems	(anti-	Aβ	strategies)	being	sought	after,	Aβ	peptide	has	turned	into	a	noteworthy	helpful	target.	By	hindering	the	proteins	in	charge	of	Aβ	aggregates,	these	techniques	keep	off	the	development	of	Aβ	totals,	and	expand	the	clearance	of	Aβ	from	the	cerebrum.	The	Aβ	immunotherapy	utilizes	anti-Aβ	antibodies,	produced	immunization	or	presented	inactively,	which	results	in	the	clearance	and	averts	collection	of	Aβ	[37].	Since,	the	primary	dynamic	Vaccine	for	AD,	AN1792	was	stopped	in	2002	because	of	the	development	of	meningoencephalitis	in	~6%	of	the	enlisted	moderate-to-serve	AD	patients,	in	the	clinical	trials	[38],	yet	more	proficient	immunization	advancement	looks	into	are	going	on	and/or	are	in	the	phase	I	clinical	trials.		While	the	pre-clinical	studies	on	transgenic	mice	when	treated	with	anti-Aβ	monoclonal	antibodies,	indicated	helpful	impacts	with	a	noteworthy	lessening	in	mind	Aβ	levels,	diminished	cerebrum	senile	plaque	pathology,	and	enhanced	insight	[39,	40].	Bapineuzumab	and	solanezumab	developed	as	the	two	driving	hopefuls	following	the	passive	immunization	route,	among	the		anti-Aβ	monoclonal	antibodies,	prompted	their	watchful	assessment	in	a	few	Phase	III	clinical	trials	[41,	42].	Shockingly,	these	vast	clinical	trials	have	neglected	to	accomplish	the	anticipated	results	[43].		At	present,	no	less	than	five	other		anti-Aβ	monoclonal	antibodies,	with	properties	particular	from	bapineuzumab	and	solanezumab,	are	in	different	phases	of	idevelopment	[44].	Nanotechnology for AD  Nano Carriers: Since, the general treatment with medications have demonstrated no noteworthy impact on the treatment of AD, the focused on medication conveyance is a critical part of the nano prescription [45]. It is apparently confused for the section of the molecules in the Central nervous system (CNS) tissues, against the Blood Brain Barrier (BBB) [46]. To encourage the navigation of these helpful particles over the BBB is been broadly investigated in the previous decade, by the utilization of biocompatible nanoparticles [47], for example, Curcumin, which is the concoction operator and a dynamic element of Turmeric , the yellow flavor which has been as of late found as a potential treatment for AD [48,49]. Conclusion and Discussion In the review, we have discussed many current and future studies that examine the use of stem cells, Immunotherapy and Nanoparticles to treat and model AD. A growing amount of evidence suggests that the stem cell based therapies could prove beneficial in the treatment of AD, by which stem cells not only has the potential to generate new neurons but also replace damaged neurons. With further clarification, stem cell may well prove as a safe yet efficient treatment in future for AD. Also, if the causes of AD are well understood and safer cell therapies are developed, AD could be conquered in the not too distant future. . Author Contributions Patel, Ankur P., Joshi, Grishma N and Ugile, Rupali P.; wrote the manuscript together. Conflicts of Interest  The authors declare no conflict of interest. References 1. Aalten P., Verhey F.R., Boziki M., Brugnolo A., Bullock R., Byrne E.J., Camus V., Caputo M., Collins D., de Deyn P.P., et al. Consistency of neuropsychiatric syndromes across dementias: Results   2. from the European Alzheimer Disease Consortium. Part II. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord. 2008; 25:1–8. doi: 10.1159/000111082. [PubMed] [Cross Ref]   Wesley W. Chen and Mathew Blurton- Johnes, Concise review- Can stem cell be used to treat or model Alzheimer's Disease? [NIH] stem cells. 2012 December; 30(12): 2612-2618.   do:10.1002/stem.1240.   3.  World Health Organization and Alzheimer’s disease International. Dementia: A Public Health Priority. WHO Press; Geneva, Switzerland: 2012. p. 103. [Cross ref]  4. Selkoe DJ. Alzheimer's disease: Genes, proteins, and therapy. Physical. Rev. 2001;81:741-766 [PubMed]  5. Person T., Popescu B.O., Cedazo- Minguez A. Oxidative stress in Alzheimer's disease: Why did antioxidant therapy fail? Ovid. Med. Cell Longev. 2014; 2014:427318. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Cross ref]  6. Demuro A., Smith M., Parker I. Single-channel Ca2+ imaging implicates AB 1-42 amyloid pores in Alzheimer's disease pathology. J.cell Biol. 2011; 195:515-524. [PMC free article] [PubMed][Cross ref]  7. Kuhla, B.; Haase, C.; Flach, K.; Luth, H.J.; Arendt, T.; Munch, G. Effect of pseudophosphorylation and cross-linking by lipid peroxidation and advanced glycation end product precursors on tau   aggregation and filament formation. J. Biol. Chem.2007, 282, 6984–6991. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]  8. Iqbal, K.; Alonso, A.C.; Gong, C.X.; Khatoon, S.; Pei, J.J.; Wang, J.Z.; Grundke-Iqbal, I. Mechanisms of neurofibrillary degeneration and the formation of neurofibrillary tangles. J. Neural Transm.   Suppl.1998, 53, 169–180. [Google Scholar] [PubMed]  9. Alzheimer's disease Association (US) 2012 Alzheimer's disease facts and figures. Washington, D.C: Alzheimer's association; 2012.   10. Bird T.D. Genetic aspects of Alzheimer disease. Genet. Med. 2008; 10:231–239. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e31816b64dc. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Cross Ref]  11. Holtzman D.M., Morris J.C., Goate A.M. Alzheimer’s disease: The challenge of the second century. Sci. Transl. Med. 2011; 3 doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3002369. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Cross Ref]  12. Feldman H. Gracon S (1996) Alzheimer's disease: symptomatic drugs under development. In: Clinical diagnosis and Management of Alzheimer's Disease (GautheirS,ed), pp239-259. Martin Dunitz Ltd. London.  13. Whitehouse PJ, Price DL, Clark AW, Coyle JT, DeLong MR. Alzheimer disease: evidence for selective loss of cholinergic neurons in the nucleus basalis. Ann Neurol 1981; 10:122–126.   [KOREAMED SYNAPSE REFID:B10]  [PubMed] [Cross Ref]  14. Bartus RT, Dean RL 3rd, Beer B, Lippa AS. The cholinergic hypothesis of geriatric memory dysfunction. Science 1982; 217:408–414. [KOREAMED SYNAPSE REFID:B11]  [PubMed] [Cross Ref]  15. Coyle JT, Price DL, DeLong MR. Alzheimer's disease: a disorder of cortical cholinergic innervation. Science 1983; 219:1184–1190. [KOREAMED SYNAPSE REFID:B12] [Pubmed] [Cross Ref]  16. Hook, V.; Toneff, T.; Bogyo, M; Greenbaum, D.; Medzihradzky, K.F.; Neveu, J.; Lane, W.; Hook, G.; Reisine, T. Inhibition of cathepsin B reduces β-amyloid production in regulated secretory vesicles of neuronal chromaffin cells. Evidence for cathepsin B as a candidate β-secretase of Alzheimer’s disease. Biol. Chem. 2005, 386,931-940. 17. Iwata N, Tsubuki S, Takaki Y, Watanabe K, Sekiguchi M, Hosoki E, Kawashima-Morishima M, Lee HJ, Hama E, Sekine-Aizawa Y, Saido TC (2000) Identification of the major Abeta1–42-degrading catabolic pathway in brain parenchyma: suppression leads to biochemical and pathological deposition. Nat Med6:143–150. 18. Massound, F.; Leger, G.C. Pharmacological treatment of Alzhemier disease. Can. J. Psychiatry 2011, 56,579-588.  19. Mangialasche F., Kivipelto M., Mecocci P., Rizzuto D., Palmer K., Winblad B., Fratiglioni L. High plasma levels of vitamin E forms and reduced Alzheimer’s disease risk in advanced age. J. Alzheimers Dis.2010; 20:1029–1037. 20. Persson T., Popescu B.O., Cedazo-Minguez A. Oxidative stress in Alzheimer’s disease: Why did antioxidant therapy fail? Oxid. Med. Cell Longev. 2014; 2014:427318.  21. Liu Y., Weick J.P., Liu H., Krencik R., Zhang X., Ma L., Zhou G.M., Ayala M., Zhang S.C. Medial ganglionic eminence-like cells derived from human embryonic stem cells correct learning and memory deficits. Nat. Biotechnol. 2013; 31:440–447. doi: 10.1038/nbt.2565. 22. Warrier S, Marimuthu R, Sekhar S, Bhuvanalakshmi G, Arfuso F, Das AK, Bhonde R, Martins R, Dharmarajan A. sFRP-mediated Wnt sequestration as a potential therapeutic target for Alzheimer's disease. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2016 Apr 7.pii: S1357-2725(16)30080-2. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2016.04.002.PubMed PMID: 27063405. 23. Park, D; Yang, G.; Bae, D K.; Lee, S. H.; Yang, Y.H.;Kyung,J; Kim,D.; Choi, E. K.; Choi, K. c.; Kim, S.U.; et al. Human adipose tissue derived mesenchymal stem cells improve cognitive function and physical activity in ageing mice. J. Neurosci. Res. 2013, 91,966-670. 24. Sugaya K , Alvarez A , Marutle A, Kwak YD , Choumkina E; Stem cell strategies for Alzheimer's disease therapy. PanminervaMedica [2006, 48(2):87-96] 25. Kim SU. 2004. Human neural stem cells genetically modified for brain repair in neurological disorders. Neuropathology 24: 159–174. 26. Kristine Freude, Carlota Pires, [...], and Vanessa Jane Hall for Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Derived from Alzheimer's disease patients: The promise, the hope and the path ahead. [Pubmed]  27. Amir M Hossini†,Matthias Megges†Alessandro Prigione,Bjoern Lichtner,Mohammad R Toliat,Wasco Wruck,Friederike Schröter,Peter Nuernberg,Hartmut Kroll,Eugenia Makrantonaki,Christos C Zoubouliss andJames Adjaye.Induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neuronal cells from a sporadic Alzheimer’s disease donor as a model for investigating AD-associated gene regulatory networks. 28. Yagi T, Ito D, Okada Y, et al. modeling familial Alzheimer’s disease with induced pluripotent stem cells.HumMol Genet. 2011; 20:4530–4539. [PubMed] 29. Blennow K, de Leon MJ, Zetterberg H. Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet. 2006; 368(9533):387–403.PubMed 30. Selkoe DJ. Alzheimer’s disease: genes, proteins, and therapy. Physiol Rev. 2001; 81(2):741–66.PubMed 31. Nakamura M., Tsuji O., Nori S., Toyama Y., Okano H. Cell transplantation for spinal cord injury focusing on iPSCs. Expert Opinion on Biological Therapy. 2012; 12(7):811–821. doi: 10.1517/14712598.2012.681774. 32.  Israel MA, Yuan SH, Bardy C, Reyna SM, Mu Y, Herrera C, et al. Probing sporadic and familial Alzheimer’s disease using induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature. 2012; 482(7384):216–20.PubMed CentralPubMed 33.  Yoshiyama Y, Higuchi M, Zhang B, et al. Synapse loss and microglial activation precede tangles in a P301S tauopathy mouse model. Neuron. 2007; 53:337–351. [PubMed] 34. Mollison KW, Fey TA, Krause RA, et al. Nephrotoxicity studies of the immune suppressants tacrolimus (FK506) and ascomycin in rat models. Toxicology. 1998; 125:169–181. [PubMed] 35. Hurdles in the development of a stem cell-based approach to treat AD from Concise Review: Can Stem Cells be used to Treat or Model Alzheimer Disease? 36. Oakley H, Cole SL, Logan S, et al. Intraneuronal beta-amyloid aggregates, neurodegeneration, and neuron loss in transgenic mice with five familial Alzheimer’s disease mutations: potential factors in amyloid plaque formation. J Neurosci. 2006; 26:10129–10140. [PubMed] 37. Cynthia A. Lemere and EliezerMasliah Nat Rev Neurol. 2010 February; 6(2): 108–119. doi:10.1038/nrneurol.2009.219, [Cross Ref] [NCBI] 38.  Gilman S, Koller M, Black RS, Jenkins L, Griffith SG, Fox NC, Eisner L, Kirby L, BoadaRovira M, Forette F, Orgogozo J-M: Clinical effects of Aβ immunization (AN1792) in patients with AD in an interrupted trial. Neurology. 2005, 64: 1553-1562. 10.1212/01.WNL.0000159740.16984.3C. 39. Bard F, Cannon C, Barbour R, et al. Peripherally administered antibodies against amyloid β-peptide enter the central nervous system and reduce pathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease. Nat Med 2000; 6:916–919. [Cross Ref.]. 40. Morgan D. Mechanisms of A beta plaque clearance following passive Abeta immunization. Neurodegener Dis 2005; 2:261–266. [Cross ref]. 41. Panza F, Frisardi V, Imbimbo BP, et al. Antib-amyloid immunotherapy for Alzheimer's disease: focus on bapineuzumab. Curr Alzheimer Res 2011; 8:808–817. [Cross Ref.] 42. Imbimbo BP, Ottonello S, Frisardi V, et al. Solanezumab for the treatment of mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease. Expert Rev ClinImmunol 2012; 8:135–149. [Cross Ref.] 43. Tayeb HO, Murray ED, Price BH, Tarazi FI. Bapineuzumab and solanezumab for Alzheimer's disease: is the 'amyloid cascade hypothesis' still alive? Expert OpinBiolTher 2013; 13:1075–1084. [Cross Ref.] 44. Francesco Panza; Giancarlo Logroscino; Bruno P. Imbimbo; Vincenzo Solfrizzid for Is there still hope for Amyloid based immunotherapy for Alzheimer's Disease? CurrOpin Psychiatry.2014; 27(2):128-137. 45. Rawat M, Singh D, Saraf S, Saraf S. Nanocarriers: promising vehicle for bioactive drugs. Biol Pharm Bull 2006; 29(9):1790-80. [Cross Ref.] 46.  Wang J, Valmikinathan CM, Yu X. Nanostructures for bypassing blood brain barrier. Current Bioactive Compounds 2009; 5(3):195-205.  47. BlasiP, GiovagnoliS, SchoubbenA, RicciM, RossiC. Solid lipid nanoparticles for targeted brain drug delivery. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2007; 59(6):454-77.  48. YangF, LimGP, BegumAN, UbedaOJ, SimmonsMR, AmbegaokarSS, et al. Curcumininhibits formation of amyloid beta oligomers and fibrils, binds plaques, and reduces amyloid in vivo. J, BiolChem 2005; 280[7], 5892-5901.  49. Amir Nazem,G.AliMansoori for Nanotechnology for Alzheimer's disease detection and treatment. UIC, 851 S Morgan St. (M/C 063), Chicago, IL 60607-7052, USA.        	