Title: Stem cell population asymmetry can reduce rate of replicative aging
Abstract:   Cycling tissues such as the intestinal epithelium, germ line, and hair
follicles, require a constant flux of differentiated cells. These tissues are
maintained by a population of stem cells, which generate differentiated
progenies and self-renew. Asymmetric division of each stem cell into one stem
cell and one differentiated cell can accomplish both tasks. However, in
mammalian cycling tissues, some stem cells divide symmetrically into two
differentiated cells and are replaced by a neighbor that divides symmetrically
into two stem cells. Besides this heterogeneity in fate (population asymmetry),
stem cells also exhibit heterogenous proliferation-rates; in the long run,
however, all stem cells proliferate at the same average rate (equipotency). We
construct and simulate a mathematical model based on these experimental
observations. We show that the complex steady-state dynamics of
population-asymmetric stem cells reduces the rate of replicative aging of the
tissue --potentially lowering the incidence of somatic mutations and genetics
diseases such as cancer. Essentially, slow-dividing stem cells proliferate and
purge the population of the fast-dividing --older-- cells which had undertaken
the majority of the tissue-generation burden. As the number of slow-dividing
cells grows, their proliferation-rate increases, eventually turning them into
fast-dividers, which are themselves replaced by newly emerging slow-dividers.
Going beyond current experiments, we propose a mechanism for equipotency that
can potentially halve the rate of replicative aging. Our results highlight the
importance of a population-level understanding of stem cells, and may explain
the prevalence of population asymmetry in a wide variety of cycling tissues.

Full Text: Stem cell population asymmetry can reduce rate of
replicative aging
Sahand Hormoz
Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics, Kohn Hall, University of California, Santa
Barbara, CA 93106, USA
Abstract
Cycling tissues such as the intestinal epithelium, germ line, and hair follicles,
require a constant ux of dierentiated cells. These tissues are maintained
by a population of stem cells, which generate dierentiated progenies and
self-renew. Asymmetric division of each stem cell into one stem cell and one
dierentiated cell can accomplish both tasks. However, in mammalian cycling
tissues, some stem cells divide symmetrically into two dierentiated cells and
are replaced by a neighbor that divides symmetrically into two stem cells.
Besides this heterogeneity in fate (population asymmetry), stem cells also
exhibit heterogenous proliferation-rates; in the long run, however, all stem
cells proliferate at the same average rate (equipotency). We construct and
simulate a mathematical model based on these experimental observations.
We show that the complex steady-state dynamics of population-asymmetric
stem cells reduces the rate of replicative aging of the tissue {potentially low-
ering the incidence of somatic mutations and genetics diseases such as cancer.
Essentially, slow-dividing stem cells proliferate and purge the population of
the fast-dividing {older{ cells which had undertaken the majority of the
tissue-generation burden. As the number of slow-dividing cells grows, their
Preprint submitted to Journal of Theoretical Biology May 16, 2013arXiv:1212.1241v2  [q-bio.CB]  16 May 2013cycling-rate increases, eventually turning them into fast-dividers, which are
themselves replaced by newly emerging slow-dividers. Going beyond current
experiments, we propose a mechanism for equipotency that can potentially
halve the rate of replicative aging. Our results highlight the importance of a
population-level understanding of stem cells, and may explain the prevalence
of population asymmetry in a wide variety of cycling tissues.
Keywords: somatic stem cells, tissue renewal, stochastic fate, intestinal
crypt, cancer
1. Introduction
As cells replicate they accumulate damage, such as somatic mutations,
which can eventually manifest as a malady; cancer is the deadliest culmina-
tion of such replicative misfortunes [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Cells that undergo many
rounds of divisions are more likely to develop cancer; particularly susceptible
are the somatic stem cells of tissues that constantly cycle, i.e. the mammalian
intestinal epithelium, epidermis, and germ line [6, 7].
Stem cells are dened for their capability to generate more stem cells {
self-renewal{ and daughter cells that dierentiate [8]. Asymmetric divisions
of a stem cell into one stem cell and one dierentiated cell will satisfy both
these objectives: replenish the stem cell pool and generate the dierentiated
progenies cycling through the tissue [9, 10]. However, lineage-tracing experi-
ments have demonstrated that in a diverse set of mammalian cycling tissues,
stem cells divide symmetrically, generating daughter cells that acquire the
same fate [11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. The balance between proliferation and dieren-
tiation is maintained at the population level: some stem cells divide into two
2stem cells, whereas others generate two dierentiated cells and are lost [16].
To maintain homeostasis {constancy in cell number and tissue organization,
both outcomes occur with frequency one-half.
The justication for the prevalence of population asymmetry in cycling
tissues remains elusive. The assertion that symmetric divisions are required
for regenerating the tissue following injury and during development [10, 17],
motivates the capability but not the continual use of this strategy in home-
ostasis. For instance, although germ line stem cells in the Drosophila ovaries
are capable of symmetric division when a stem cell is lost, during normal
proliferation all divisions are asymmetric [19]. We propose that population
asymmetry reduces the rate of replicative aging in mammalian cycling tissue
maintained by rapidly dividing stem cells.
Herein, we formulate a model and simulate the complex dynamics of stem
cells with population asymmetry and external regulation: stem cells lost to
dierentiation are replaced by their neighbors. The source of stochasticity in
stem cell fate is the asynchronous waiting time before division. We show that
heterogenous stem cells {cells that cycle at dierent rates{ with population
asymmetry undergo fewer divisions for the same ux of dierentiated cells
compared with stem cells that use division asymmetry.
The degree of heterogeneity does not need to be large: the slowest di-
viders are only four times slower than the fastest dividers in the population,
consistent with experimental observations. A single stem cell's cycling-rate
uctuates, but its long-time average is equal to the population average. All
stem cells are therefore equipotent; no single cell has a proliferative advantage
over the others in the long run.
3Going beyond current experiments, we show that the replicative-aging
rate can be further reduced using the following strategy: stem cells by de-
fault divide faster than the average rate of cycling in the population. External
stimuli slow down the division rate, a trait which is encoded in methylation
patterns and passed on to the daughter cells. After a random number of
divisions the methylation signal is lost and the daughter stem cells revert to
their default behavior. This simple strategy can reduce the rate of replica-
tive aging by a factor of two; we conjecture that this mechanism is used in
mammalian cycling tissues.
2. Results
We will refer to replicative aging {the cumulative number of divisions
undergone by a cell{ simply as `aging'. Cell aging without replication can
occur through post-mitotic mutations in mitrochondrial DNA [20], stress-
induced DNA damage, or accumulation of altered proteins [21, 22].
If a population of stem cells divides synchronously, all the stem cells will
age by the same amount regardless of their ancestry; both division asym-
metric and population asymmetric strategies are equivalent. A slight degree
of heterogeneity in the division rates, however, can lower the average aging
rate, if symmetric divisions are allowed, where some stems cells can replace
others (Fig.1). In such a population, the fast-dividing cells take over most of
the proliferative burden and are eventually replaced by slow-dividing cells.
We consider an idealized model of cycling tissues (Methods, Fig.2): a
xed number of stem cells form an epithelial basal layer [23]. After a ran-
dom waiting-time, stem cells divide asynchronously {along their out of plane
4Figure 1: Heterogeneous proliferation rates. A) Two stem cells (orange) divide asymmet-
rically three times at a constant rate generating six dierentiated progenies (blue). Both
stem cells will have aged by the same amount (three divisions). The phylogeny tree of each
stem cell {neglecting the branches corresponding to somatic cells{ is simply a straight line.
B) The stem cell on the left undergoes four asymmetric divisions followed by a symmetric
division into two dierentiated cells. Stem cell on the right divides symmetrically into
two stem cells at a lower rate. The net product is the same as A. The two stem cells,
however, have aged by only one division. With symmetric divisions, the phylogeny of a
stem cell is more complicated. An example of a phylogeny tree is shown for stem cells
with heterogenous cycling rates and symmetric divisions; terminal nodes correspond to
stem cells currently in the population. The highlighted part of the tree depicts a stem cell
that has undergone 8 divisions and is younger than some of the other descendants.
5axis{ into two dierentiated progenies, which leave the layer. In response, a
randomly-chosen neighbor symmetrically divides in the lateral direction and
replaces the lost stem cell {externally regulated division. This model closely
resembles the actual dynamics of mammalian cycling tissues [12, 13, 14, 15].
Since a division into two dierentiated cells is always accompanied by an-
other into two stem cells, the frequency of both types of division is 0.5,
ensuring a constant ux of dierentiated cells and self-renewal of the stem
cell population.
We will address in detail the validity of the assumptions behind this model
in the Discussion section. However, we note two key points at the onset.
Division into two dierentiated progenies can be replaced by a stem cell that
simply dierentiates and leaves the basal layer. This simpler picture does not
change the results. However, as we will show below, it is essential that loss
of a stem cell to dierentiation trigger symmetric division of a neighboring
cell, and not the other way around.
The above proliferation strategy results in dynamics that closely resemble
the `stepping-stone' model of neutral drift in population dynamics [24, 16]
(see also `voter' models in statistical physics [25]). If we initially label all cells
in the population with a dierent color (Fig.3), overtime, we observe that
most cells leave the stem cell layer, and are replaced by their neighbor. Those
that remain, grow in number, forming clusters of daughter cells (of the same
color) called clones. If all stem cells are equivalent and cycling at the same
rate, no clone is more likely to survive than its neighbors. The boundaries
between adjacent clones diuse back and forth, roughly expanding asp
t; the
size of the surviving clones therefore increases as t(this argument only holds
6Figure 2: Population asymmetry. Stem cells form an epithelium attached to the basal
membrane. A stem cell divides symmetrically into two dierentiated cells and leaves the
basal layer. The lost stem cell is replaced by one of its neighbors which divides laterally
into two stem cells. All division are symmetric; each type occurs with frequency 1 =2. The
net product of the two divisions is two dierentiated cells and two stem cells. Above, the
third stem cell from the left has divided symmetrically into two dierentiated cells and is
leaving the basal layer. Its neighbor to the right is dividing symmetrically into two stem
cells to replace the lost cell.
7Figure 3: Clonal expansion and loss of heterogeneity. Cells are initially colored at random
and their evolution followed. Color of the daughter cells is inherited from the parent.
Eventually the clone of a red stem cell xates. The time steps from left to right and top to
bottom are, t=1, 20, 60, 100,140, 200, and 260. The stem cells have heterogenous division
rates,= 0:15.
in 1 and 2 dimensions, for a rigorous derivation and the log correction to
this scaling in 2D, see [26]). Eventually, in a nite population, one clone will
take over, achieving xation; in Fig.3, a stem cell initially labeled red xates.
The resulting distribution of clone sizes is self-similar: the distribution of the
ratio of clone sizes to the average clone size at any given time is constant.
Statistical signatures of clone sizes have been used to experimentally conrm
the above dynamics in cycling tissues in vivo [16].
2.1. Heterogeneity
Next, consider a heterogenous population, where stem cells cycle at dier-
ent rates: stem cell iterminally divides into dierentiated progenies at rate
ridrawn from a Gaussian distribution with mean 0.5 and standard deviation
8. The cycling-rate is inherited by the daughter cells following a division
into two stem cells. The average cycling-rate of the population is held xed
to ensure a constant ux of one dierentiated cell per stem cell per unit of
time (Methods).
We emphasize that cycling refers to a stem cell dividing into dierentiated
progenies and its subsequent replacement by a neighbor. The term slow-
dividers will refer to cells that are less likely to divide into dierentiated
progenies and leave the stem cell population in a given interval of time. As
the name implies, a cluster of slow-dividers will also undergo fewer stem cell
to stem cell divisions in a give period of time since fewer cells need to be
replaced. However, stem cells will always divide to replace a lost neighbor;
the rate of this division is not related to the cell's own cycling rate, r, but
indirectly to that of the neighbor. This distinction is important when a slow-
divider is adjacent to a fast-divider. Alternatively, we can think of ras the
rate of dierentiation, which indirectly sets the division rate of a cell through
its neighbors.
The clones are no longer equivalent; some are descendants of fast-dividing
cells and others of slow-dividing cells. Clusters of fast-dividing cells con-
tribute more to the ux since they cycle more quickly. However, at their
interfaces, the slow-dividing clones invade the fast-dividing clones, since at
any time-step, the fast-dividing cells are more likely to undergo terminal dif-
ferentiation and be replaced by a neighbor. The fast-dividing cells that are
contributing more to the ux {and thereby aging faster{ are systematically
removed from the population and replaced by younger cells.
Dene the population-averaged aging rate (t) as the ratio of the total
9number of divisions starting from time t= 0 undergone by the stem cells
present in the population at time tto the total number of dierentiated cells
produced since t= 0.= 1 for homogenous population {where all cells
proliferate at the same rate, since all the stem cells contribute to the ux
equally and on average one dierentiated cell is produced by each division.
Similarly,= 1 for a population with division asymmetry. Surprisingly,
simulations show that the aging-rate with heterogeneity is lower than that
of a homogenous or division asymmetric population, (t)<1, at early times
(Fig.4A); eventually, lim t!1!1.
We can understand the eventual reversion to = 1 by considering the
dynamics more carefully. The initially heterogenous population of cells rst
gives rise to an abundance of slow-dividing cell, since they are more likely
to invade their neighbors. As the number of slow-dividing cells grows {
clonal expansion, their cycling-rate increases to ensure a constant ux of
dierentiated progenies. The initially Gaussian distribution of cycling-rates
in the population develops a spike at the slowly-dividing rates, the spike
grows and reverts to the mean (Fig.4B). Eventually the distribution becomes
a-function at 0.5 when xation has occurred and every stem cell has the
same proliferation rate.
2.2. Phenomenological model
A simple phenomenological model can elucidate the essential mechanisms
for lowering the rate of aging. We include the following key facts in the
model: 1) The boundaries of the slow-dividing clones grow faster than would
be expected from neutral dynamics (Fig.4D). At early times, the boundaries
grow on average with velocity 0 :5 r, whereris the cycling-rate. 2) As
10Figure 4: Heterogeneous but not equipotent. A) Population-averaged aging rate as a
function of time. Initially <1 before reverting to its asymptotic value of 1. 50 runs are
superimposed for each value of . The thick colored lines are the average over the runs.
Solid-blue lines are the analytical results of the phenomenological model. B) Frequency of
observing a cell with cycling-rate r for the rst 120 time steps superimposed ( = 0:15).
The distribution narrows over time, eventually becoming a -function as one clone xates.
C) Clone sizes in the population as a function of time for the same parameter values. Some
clones expands as others shrink. D) Average clone size as a function of time. There is a
signicant deviation at early times from the linear prediction of the neutral drift model.
11the number of slow-dividing cells increases, their cycling-rate also increases,
approaching the population-average rate, 0.5. We assume that the fractional
rate of increase of the cycling-rate ris the same as the fractional increase in
the number of cells dividing at rate r.
Using a Lagrangian framework, we follow the evolution of the cells that at
t= 0 cycled at rate r0; at timet, the number of these cells in the population
is denoted as N(r0;t) and their cycling-rate as r(r0;t). In 2D, the dynamical
evolution is given by,
1
2p
N(r0;t)@N(r0;t)
@t=1
2 r(r0;t) (1)
@r(r0;t)
@t=1
N(r0;t)@N(r0;t)
@tr(r0;t) (2)
The number of stem cells cycling at rate r0at timetis
N(r0;t) =Z
N(r0;t)1
j@r0
@rjt(r0 r(r0;t))dr0: (3)
Eqs. 1 and 2 can be combined into the following non-linear ODE {
denotingN(r0;t) asNfor simplicity,
d2N
dt2=1
2N 1p
NdN
dt+1
NdN
dt2
: (4)
The initial distribution of proliferation rates in the simulations is a Gaus-
sian with mean 0.5 and standard deviation . For simplicity, we follow two
population of cells from this distribution: fast-dividing cells cycling at rate
rf= 0:5 +, and slow-dividing cells cycling at rate rs= 0:5 . Sim-
ulations (Fig.4) show a monotonous decrease in the second moment of the
cycling-rate distribution due to loss of heterogeneity {the mean is xed by
12construct; the third moment, however, peaks when is at its minimum. We
claim that to the lowest order, the rate of aging at time tis a function of
the third moment of the distribution of the cycling-rates in the population at
timet. The more lop-sided the distribution, the more prevalent the presence
of slow-dividing clusters that invade their fast-dividing neighbors, ensuring
<1. The analytical estimate of (t) is
1 (t)
N(rs;t) 1
2 r(rs;t)3 N(rf;t) 
r(rf;t) 1
231
3: (5)
The exact shape of the curve (t) depends on the system size. Loss of
heterogeneity {rate of reversion of (t) to its asymptotic value{ will be slower
for larger systems since there is a larger pool of initially slow-dividing cells.
The analytical theory is a good t to the simulations results (Fig.4A, Fig.7C);
only two tting parameters are used (Methods).
2.3. Heterogeneous and equipotent
To sustain the low rate of aging, we need to ensure that heterogeneity
is not lost by clonal expansion, and somehow reintroduced into the system.
Inspired by methylation as a method of passing epigenetic information to
daughter cells (see Discussion), we assume that after a random number of
divisions the inherited methylation patterns are lost and the cell's cycling-
rate randomized (see Methods for implementation). The average number of
divisions (time-scale) to losing inherited information is denoted as eq. If we
average the behavior of the cells over time-scales much longer than eq, all
cells are equipotent: there are no slow or fast dividers, all cells proliferate at
the average rate. With equipotency, reaches a steady-state value 1, which
13is approximately equal to (eq) in the heterogenous but non-equipotent case
(Fig.5A).
A steady-state rate of aging 1<1 does not imply that there is a
steady-state distribution of cycling-rates, i.e. a constant number of slow and
fast dividers. The dynamics is more complicated: as in the non-equipotent
case, slow dividers expand as their cycling-rate increases (Fig.5B). Equipo-
tency, however, ensures that somewhere else in the population, a new slow-
divider emerges and expands, continuing the cycle (Fig.6). Time-averaging
the cycling-rate distribution for a suciently-long periods, yields a static
skewed distribution {non-zero third moment (Fig.5C). There is an abun-
dance of slow-dividers (tail of the distribution) which are compensated by an
abundance of cells that divide only slightly faster than the average.
Equipotency also restores the self-similar dynamics; stem cells behave like
a homogenous population for time scales larger than eq. For example, the
self-similar character of the clone size distributions, and the linear growth
of the average clone size is restored (Fig. 5D), consistent with experimental
observations [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16].
2.4. Optimizing
If cycling-rates randomize too quickly, slow-dividing cells do not have
sucient time to replace their faster dividing neighbors. If the randomization
rate is too slow, the slow-dividing clones expand too much, reducing the
heterogeneity, and increasing the rate of aging. There is an intermediate
optimal time-scale for equipotency. We examined the dependence of the
steady-state value of aging rate 1oneq(Fig.7A). The optimal value of 
eq
that minimizes aging rate is approximately the time required to achieve the
14Figure 5: Heterogenous and equipotent. A) Aging rate as a function of time for = 0:15
and four dierent values of eq; 50 runs and their average. B) Distribution of cycling-rates
superimposed for 20 time steps (3981 to 4000) for eq= 250. At steady-state, waves of
slow dividers are generated and sent towards the mean, where they annihilate (see Fig.6).
C) Distribution of proliferation-rates averaged for 1000 steps (3001 to 4000). The time-
averaged distribution looks Gaussian but is asymmetric (non-zero third moment). The
inset shows the ratio of the actual distribution to a Gaussian t. There is an excess of
slow-dividers {at the tail on the left-side. D) Average clone size as a function of time for
eq= 1. The self-similar behavior of the neutral drift models is recovered.
15Figure 6: Maintaining heterogeneity. The color-coding corresponds to the cycling-rate of
each cell. Each cell randomizes its cycling rate (drawn from a normal distribution with
= 0:15) foreq= 50. A slow-divider in the middle proliferates while increasing its
cycling-rate, eventually reaching the mean rate 0.5. A new cluster of slow-dividing cells
has formed in the bottom-left corner and is expanding. The time steps shown are from
left to right and top to bottom, t=90 to 140 in increments of 10.
16transient minimum in a heterogenous non-equipotent population; 
eqis the
point of extremum in Eq.5:d(t)
dtjeq0.
To further optimize , we consider other feasible mechanisms:
Bimodal distribution of cycling-rates . Thus far, equipotency was
implemented by randomizing cycling-rates after a few divisions. Can a dif-
ferent mechanism do better? In Fig.7B, cells establish equipotency by reset-
ting their cycling-rate to a xed value above-average  + 0:5. Physically, this
corresponds to stem cells that are programmed by default as fast-dividers.
However, global signaling establishes a methylation pattern where most cells
divide slower; after a random number of divisions the cell loses the methyla-
tion program and reverts to its default behavior.
This approach results in a bimodal distribution of cycling-rates: slow-
dividing cells that replace their neighbors and proliferate, balanced by the
fast-dividing cells that are constantly injected into the population when cells
reset their cycling-rates. For optimal equipotency time-scale, 
eq, and a fac-
tor of 6 dierence between the proliferation-rates of the fastest and slowest
dividers, we nd 1= 0:4. This, implies approximately a two-order of
magnitude (99%) reduction in incidence of ve somatic mutations {on av-
erage required for onset of cancer{ compared with homogenous or division-
asymmetric populations (Methods). For our choice of parameters, the opti-
mal time-scale for equipotency is now much shorter (around 3-5 divisions).
Quick addition of fast-dividers is required to balance the growing number of
slow-dividing stem cells. This strategy is so eective that we conjecture that
it is potentially implemented in cycling tissues (see Discussion).
Biassed replacement . We consider the possibility that beside terminal
17dierentiation a stem cell can also proliferate by forcing the terminal dif-
ferentiation of a neighbor. Fig.7C shows the aging-rate where a stem cell
cycling at rate r, proliferates with probability 1  r. A modest improvement
is observed (4% for our choice of parameters) since the fast-dividing cells are
even more likely to be purged from the population.
One-dimension . Finally, we consider a population of stem cells con-
strained to one-dimension. Although the steady-state aging rate 1is not
signicantly dierent from that of the two-dimensional case, the dynamics of
clonal expansion and loss of heterogeneity is qualitatively dierent (Fig.7D).
For little or no heterogeneity, the clone boundaries expand by diusion: the
average surviving clone size increases asp
t(as opposed to tin 2D). As het-
erogeneity increases the boundaries drift rather than diuse and the clone
size scaling becomes closer to linear. The slower clonal expansion implies
that heterogeneity is lost at lower a rate, which maximizes the transient pe-
riod where  < 1. 1D systems can help optimize the aging rate for nite
durations for systems without equipotency.
3. Discussion
We found that population asymmetry in stem cells with heterogeneous
division rates and external regulation can substantially reduce the rate of
replicative aging; potentially lowering incidence of somatic mutations and
proliferative-maladies such as cancer. Our analysis revealed a non-trivial
steady-state dynamics: slow-dividing cells constantly replace their fast-dividing
(older) neighbors who had shouldered the brunt of the proliferative demand.
A key requirement was equipotent stem cells: in the long run no cell had
18Figure 7: Minimizing rate of aging. A) Asymptotic value of aging-rate as a function of
eqfor dierent degrees of heterogeneity . Optimaleqis at some intermediate value. B)
Instead of randomizing, the cell's cycling-rate is reset to  + 0:5. (Top)as a function of
t for dierent values of eq; = 0:15. Minimum occurs at the high equipotency rate of
eq= 2:5. The bimodal distribution of the division rates is shown on the bottom {every
5th step for the rst 2000 iterations: cells are either fast dividers or slow dividers. The
inset shows the spatial heterogeneity of the two types of stem cells (color-coding as in
Fig.6). On the bottom-left, we plot 1as a function of eqfor various value of  . C)
Decision of fate is biassed so that slow-dividing cells are more likely to replace a neighbor.
(Top)as a function of time and no equipotency. The solid blue lines are the ts from
the phenomenological model (Methods). (Bottom) Equipotency for four dierent values
ofeq;= 0:15. D) 1D system of size 10000x1. (Top) as a function of time. Loss of
heterogeneity (clonal expansion) is slower in 1D. (Bottom) Average clone size as a function
of time for two values of . The clones grow sub-linearly. B) Top, C), and D) Top, multiple
trajectories are 50 runs and their average (thick line).
19a proliferative advantage over the others; every cell divided at the same
average rate. Equipotency was enforced by assuming that after a random
number of divisions, the resulting daughter cells lost their inherited traits.
Going beyond current experiments, we conjectured that equipotency resets
the cycling-rate of the cells to a default value that is larger than the mean
division-rate of the population.
Stem cell population asymmetry using external regulation {where termi-
nal dierentiation of a stem cell triggers the expansion of a neighbor{ has
been veried using lineage-tracing experiments in the mammalian intestinal
crypt and germ line [12, 13, 14, 15]. These quantitative studies have demon-
strated that these tissues are maintained by an equipotent quickly-cycling
population of stem cells. Do these populations also exhibit heterogeneity?
Direct observation of heterogeneity in the intestinal epithelium was made by
Pruitt et al. [27] who using tamoxifen induced Cre-recombinase activity on
the Mcm2 gene observed cell-cycle times ranging from 1 to 4 days, consistent
with the degree of heterogeneity assumed above. An even larger discrepancy
in cycling rates is exhibited by progenies of the Lgr5+stem cells in the in-
testinal crypt that remain dormant (for weeks) as precursors to the secretory
cells, but are capable of reverting back to a cycling stem cell [28].
Despite a lack of direct evidence of heterogeneity of cycling-times in the
germ line, there are observations of heterogeneous gene-expression in undif-
ferentiated cells of the mammalian spermatogonia [29]. Two types of un-
dierentiated cells AsandAprshow an expression level low in Ngn3 and
high inGFR 1, whereas undierentiated Aalcells have the opposite ex-
pression levels. Aalcells are thought to be primed for dierentiation and
20could correspond to the fast-cycling cells in our model. Short-term lineage
tracing experiments have shown that the expression patterns can reversibly
change with GFR 1lo/Ngn3hicells becoming GFR 1hi/Ngn3lo, ensuring
equipotency [15]. When AsandAprcells commit to dierentiation, they are
replaced by fragmentation of a neighboring Aalcell that reverses its expres-
sion patterns [14]. However, the inter-conversion rate between Aalcells and
the undierentiated cells AsandApris comparable to their cycling rates [29];
the equipotency time-scale eqmight be too short for a noticeable impact on
the rate of replicative aging.
Intestinal crypt stem cells are also believed to exhibit dynamics where
the terminal dierentiation and loss of one stem cell results in expansion of a
neighbor. Wnt signaling [30, 31] {in particular a global Wnt gradient along
the crypt [32]{ is thought to control the average proliferation rate [33]; as do
insulin-like growth factors like IGF1 [27]. Nearest-neighbor communication
seems to be mediated by Notch signaling and lateral inhibition. In the crypt,
stem cells laterally inhibit their neighbors to ensure that the neighbor's fate
at division is dierentiation [34]. A biological mechanisms for the biassed
expansion proposed above (Fig.7C) might be the build-up of excess Notch
ligands by slow-dividing cells.
We assumed that cycling-rates were passed on to daughter cells after
division. Moreover, to establish equipotency, we required that the rates
randomize after a few divisions; the inherited information forgotten. Both of
these requirements can be implemented through epigenetic methylation tags
[35, 36]. Yatabe et al. [37] studied methylation patterns in the human colon
crypts and observed somatic inheritance, random methylation changes, and
21evidence of population asymmetry.
Our model is an idealized picture of stem cell proliferation. We only fo-
cused on aging in the somatic stem cells and not the dierentiated progenies
as they are continually discarded. We also assumed that stem cells divided
symmetrically into two dierentiated cells. The product of this division can
also be thought of as transit-amplifying (TA) progenies that undergo a few
more rounds of division before terminal dierentiation. Including TA cells
as the dierentiation product of rapidly cycling stem cells does not change
the relative improvement observed using population asymmetry over divi-
sion asymmetry. Of course, a hierarchical strategy, where extremely slowly-
dividing (quiescent) stem cells give rise to TA cells that undergo many rounds
of division before terminal dierentiation [6], signicantly reduces the aging
rate of the stem cells {regardless of the division strategy. However, experi-
mental evidence [11, 12, 13, 14, 15] suggests that many mammalian cycling
tissues are supported by a population of rapidly dividing stem cells.
We assumed that after a random waiting time a stem cell divides into two
dierentiated cells. However, it is not clear that dierentiation is tied to cell
cycle. Our results will not change if stem cells simply dierentiate and leave
as opposed to dividing into dierentiated cells that leave. Heterogeneity
in cycling-rate will then be a consequence of heterogeneity in dwell-time
before dierentiation. However, it is essential that dierentiation triggers
the proliferation of a neighbor. If, on the contrary, dierentiation is triggered
by a neighbor's division into two stem cells, the opposite behavior emerges
{aging rate increases. We also assumed that all divisions were symmetric;
stem cell to two stem cells, or stem cell to two dierentiated progenies. A
22mixed strategy can also be considered where some fraction of divisions are
asymmetric. This will not change our results qualitatively. However, the
observed improvement in aging rate decreases as the fraction of asymmetric
divisions increases.
The geometry of a 2D and 1D epithelium of stem cells used in the model
is an over-simplication of real tissues. Although stem cells seem to be
predominantly conned to a thin {few cells deep{ layer in cycling tissues,
they are usually interspersed with other types of somatic cells. For example,
stem cells at the base of the crypt (Lgr5 cells) are juxtaposed by Paneth cells,
and in the germ line by large somatic Sertoli cells [15]. A more comprehensive
model should account for this added complexity, however, the results will
not be qualitatively dierent. Previous models of population asymmetry
that have relied on eective simplied `lattices' of stem cells are in good
agreement with experiments [16].
Notion of heterogeneity can be employed in a dierent context. Most
populations of stem cells contain quiescent cells [38, 39] that cycle so slowly
that are eectively dormant. Despite suggestions that quiescent stem cells
can increase longevity by replacing actively-dividing stem cells [39], lineage-
tracing experiments [15, 16] suggest that these cells play little to no role in
homeostatic cycling of tissues. Rather, they seem to be prominent in tissue
repair following a catastrophic perturbation [18] and during development [38].
The heterogeneity used in our model is subtle and the slow-dividing cells are
in no way quiescent. To ensure that extremely slow-dividing cells were not
essential for our results, we repeated the simulations while constraining the
cycling-rates to3and observed the same reduction in the aging rate. For
23instance, constraining the division probability of the bimodal strategy (Fig.
7B) to 0.2-0.8, resulted in a population where the fastest dividers proliferated
only 3 times faster than the slowest dividers; the dynamics still generated
= 0:87, a potential 50% reduction in incidence of cancer.
Our results motivate a population level understanding of stem cells. Be-
cause of heterogeneity and complex dynamics, static gene-expression proles
provide limited insight into stem cell phenotypes. Study of population epi-
genetics and population dynamics of stem cells can bring fresh insight into
the delicate interplay that occurs in homeostatic cycling tissues.
4. Methods
4.1. Simulations
An asynchronous cellular automata algorithm was used: A 2D hexagonal
lattice ofNpoints with periodic boundaries is generated and perturbed by
adding a random number drawn from a Gaussian distribution with zero mean
and standard deviation 30% of the lattice constant to the x and y coordinates
of each point. The Ncells are constructed by a Voronoi decomposition of
the randomized lattice; two cells that share a common edge are denoted as
neighbors. Each cell is initially assigned a cycling-rate r{corresponding to a
Poisson rate parameter{ drawn from a Gaussian distribution with mean 0.5
and standard deviation .
In each time step, the following sequence is executed Ntimes: 1) A cell is
chosen at random from the lattice. With probability r, it divides terminally
into two dierentiated cells. 2) If the division occurs, one of its neighbors is
chosen at random to divide into two stem cells and replace the lost cell. The
24daughter cells inherit the cycling rate, and the age (number of prior divisions
plus one) of their parent. 3) If equipotency is turned on, at every division
with probability Ne=eq{whereeqis the time-scale for equipotency and Ne
the number of steps required prior to equipotency{ the cell advances one step
to resetting its cycling rate. After completing Nesteps, the cycling rate of
the cell is redrawn from a Gaussian distribution with mean 0.5 and standard
deviation. The new cycling rate is inherited by all the daughter cells in
subsequent divisions. At the end of each time step, every cell's cycling rate
is modied by the same amount to ensure that the population-average of r
is 0.5. On average, at every time step a total of Ndierentiated cells are
generated.
Above algorithm was modied for two cases: 1) In Fig. 7B (Optimization)
equipotency is introduced by always resetting the cell's cycling rate to 0 :5+.
Moreover, the cycling rates are constrained to the range 3; 2) In Fig. 7C
(Optimization) the selected cell divides symmetrically into dierentiated cells
(step 1 above) with probability r; with probability 1  rit divides into two
stem cells and removes a random neighbor. 3) In Fig. 7D (Optimization) the
above algorithm was modied to run for a one-dimensional lattice. Ne= 1 for
all plots with equipotency, except for Fig. 7A, where Ne= 10. The algorithm
was implemented in Matlab R2011b. We used a 100x100 and 10000x1 lattice
for the 2D and 1D simulations respectively (N = 10000). For generating the
mosaic plots of the lattices (Fig. 3, 5, inset in 7B) a 30x30 lattice (N=900)
was used.
254.2. Estimating incidence of cancer
Cells need to accumulate a series of independent mutations for tumorige-
nesis [3]. Assume each step (mutation) iis an independent Poisson process
with rateki. The probability that step iwill occur in the time interval tto
t+dtis an exponential distribution, wi(t) =kie kit{known as dwell time.
The probability that step 2 occurs at time tis contingent on step 1 having oc-
curred at some time before t0<t,p2(t) =Rt
0w1(t0)w2(t t0)dt0= (w1
w2)(t),
where
is the convolution operator. Similarly, probability of completing N
steps at time tis given by,
pN(t) = (w1
:::wi
:::wN)(t): (6)
Assuming that cancer is an unlikely event ( kit1), we can use a Taylor
expansion in t(Tom Chou, private communication),
pN(t)tN
(N 1)!NY
i=1ki: (7)
pN(t) is the incidence of cancer; the probability that an individual of age tde-
velops cancer in the time interval dt. Heterogeneous population-asymmetric
stem cells will age at a lower rate, k0
i=ki. The likelihood of incidence
of cancer is smaller by a factor of N. For= 0.9, and 0.4, and a typical
value ofN= 5 [3], incidence of cancer is roughly reduced by 40%, and 99%
respectively.
4.3. Fitting the data
To t the simulation, we numerically solved Eq.4 using the initial condi-
tionN(rs=f;t= 0) =NG(0:5), whereGis a Gaussian distribution with
26mean 0.5 and standard deviation , andNis a system-size dependent tting
parameter. The other tting parameter is the proportionality constant in
Eq.5. For Fig. 4A, N = 85000 and = 1.15. In above scheme, the random
nature of the lattice (for our choice of randomness, the mean coordination
number is 6 with standard deviation 1) biases the average aging rate so
that a homogeneous population ( =0) will have = 1.015. When a hexago-
nal lattice with no randomness is used, =1. A 0.015 oset is added to the
theoretical curves to account for this. For Fig.7C (top) N = 200000 and =
1.25. For each gure, the four curves shown are tted simultaneously using
the same two tting parameters.
Acknowledgments
The author thanks Boris Shraiman, Adel Dayarian, and Sid Goyal for
helpful discussions and critical reading of the manuscript, and Arnie Levine
for introduction to the subject. This research was supported in part by the
National Science Foundation under Grant No. NSF PHY11-25915.
References
[1] D. Hanahan, R.A. Weinberg RA, The hallmarks of cancer, Cell 100
(2000) 57-70.
[2] J.M. Bishop, Cancer: the rise of the genetic paradigm, Genes Dev. 9
(1995) 1309-1315.
[3] B. Vogelstein, K.W. Kinzler, The multistep nature of cancer, Trends
Genet. 9 (1993) 138-141.
27[4] B. Vogelstein, D. Lane, A.J. Levine, Surng the p53 network, Nature
408 (2000) 307.
[5] B. Vogelstein, K.W. Kinzler, Cancer genes and the pathways they con-
trol, Nat. Med. 10 (2004) 789-799.
[6] J. Cairns, Mutation selection and the natural history of cancer, Nature
255 (1975) 197-200.
[7] F. Michor, Y. Iwasa, M.A. Nowak, Dynamics of cancer progression, Nat.
Rev. Cancer 4 (2004) 197-206.
[8] L. Siminovitch, E.A. McCulloch, J.E. Till, The distribution of colony-
forming cells among spleen colonies, J. Cell. Comp. Physiol. 62 (1963)
327-336.
[9] C.S. Potten, M. Loeer, Stem cells: attributes, cycles, spirals, pitfalls
and uncertainties. Lessons for and from the crypt, Development 110
(1990) 1001-1020.
[10] S.J. Morrison, J. Kimble, Asymmetric and symmetric stem-cell divisions
in development and cancer, Nature 441 (2006) 1068-1074.
[11] E. Clayton, D.P. Doupe, A.M. Klein, D. Winton, B.D. Simons, P.H.
Jones, A single type of progenitor cell maintains the epidermis, Nature
446 (2007) 185.
[12] C. Lopez-Garcia, A.M. Klein, B.D. Simons, D.J. Winton, Intestinal stem
cell replacement follows a pattern of neutral drift, Science 330 (2010)
822-825.
28[13] H.J. Snippert, L.G. van der Flier, T. Sato, J.H. van Es, M. van den
Born, C. Kroon-Veenboer, N. Barker, A.M. Klein, J. van Rheenen, B.D.
Simons, Intestinal crypt homeostasis results from neutral competition
between symmetrically dividing Lgr5 stem cells, Cell 143 (2010) 134-
144.
[14] A.M. Klein, T. Nakagawa, R. Ichikawa, S. Yoshida, B.D. Simons, Mouse
germ line stem cells undergo rapid and stochastic turnover, Cell Stem
Cell 7 (2010) 214-224.
[15] B.D. Simons, H. Clevers, Strategies for homeostatic stem cell self-
renewal in adult tissues, Cell 145 (2011) 851-862.
[16] A.M. Klein, B.D. Simons, Universal patterns of stem cell fate in cycling
adult tissues, Development 138 (2011) 3103-3111.
[17] F.M. Watt, B.L. Hogan, Out of Eden: stem cells and their niches, Sci-
ence 287 (2000) 1427-1430.
[18] K.S. Yan, L.A. Chia, X. Li, A. Ootani, J. Su, J.Y. Lee, N. Su, Y. Luo,
S.C. Heilshorn, M.R. Amieva, E. Sangiorgi, M.R. Capecchi, C.J. Kuo,
The intestinal stem cell markers Bmi1 and Lgr5 identify two functionally
distinct populations. PNAS 109 (2012) 466-471.
[19] A. Spradling, D. Drummond-Barbosa, T. Kai, Stem cells nd their niche,
Nature 414 (2001) 98.
[20] D.C. Wallace, Mitochondrial diseases in man and mouse, Science 283
(1999) 1482-1488.
29[21] T.B. Kirkwood, Understanding the odd science of aging, Cell 120 (2005)
437-447.
[22] J. Campisi, F. dAdda di Fagagna, Cellular senescence: When bad things
happen to good cells, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 8 (2007) 729-740.
[23] S.J. Morrison, A.C. Spradling, Stem cells and niches: Mechanisms that
promote stem cell maintenance throughout life, Cell 132 (2008) 598-611.
[24] M. Kimura, G.H. Weiss, The stepping stone model of population struc-
ture and the decrease of genetic correlation with distance, Genetics 49
(1964) 561.
[25] R.A. Holley, T.M. Liggett, Ergodic theorems for weakly interacting sys-
tems and the voter model, Ann. Probab. 4 (1976) 195-228.
[26] M. Bramson, D. Grieath, Asymptotics for interacting particle systems
onzd, Probability Theory and Related Fields 53 (1980) 183-196.
[27] S.C. Pruitt, A. Freeland, A. Kudla, Cell cycle heterogeneity in the small
intestinal crypt and maintenance of genome integrity, Stem Cells 28
(2010) 1250-1259.
[28] S.J.A. Buczacki, H.I. Zecchini, A.M. Nicholson, R. Russell, L. Ver-
meulen, R. Kemp, D.J. Winton, Intestinal label-retaining cells are se-
cretory precursors expressing Lgr5, Nature (2013) 495:65-69.
[29] T. Nakagawa, M. Sharma, Y.I. Nabeshima, R.E. Braun, S. Yoshida S,
Functional hierarchy and reversibility within the murine spermatogenic
stem cell compartment, Science 328 (2010) 62-67.
30[30] L.G. van der Flier, H. Clevers, Stem cells, self-renewal, and dierentia-
tion in the intestinal epithelium, Annu. Rev. Physiol. 71 (2009) 241-260
[31] A. Gregorie, H. Clevers, Wnt signaling in the intestinal epithelium:
from endoderm to cancer, Genes. Dev 19: 877-890.
[32] E. Batlle et al., Beta-catenin and TCF mediate cell positioning in the
intestinal epithelium by controlling the expression of EphB/ephrinB,
Cell 111 (2002) 251-263.
[33] P. Buske et al., A comprehensive model of the spatio-temporal stem cell
and tissue organisation in the intestinal crypt, PLOS Comput. Biol. 7
(2011) e1001045.
[34] P. Buske et al., Notch/gamma-secretase inhibition turns proliferative
cells in intestinal crypts and adenomas into goblet cells, Nature 435
(2005) 959-963.
[35] G.P. Pfeifer, S.D. Steigerwald, R.S. Hansen, S.M. Gartler, A.D.
Riggs, Polymerase chain reaction-aided genomic sequencing of an X
chromosome-linked CpG island: methylation patterns suggest clonal
inheritance, CpG site autonomy, and an explanation of activity state
stability, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 87 (1990) 8252-8256.
[36] A.J. Silva, K. Ward, R. White, Mosaic methylation in clonal tissue, Dev.
Biol. 156 (1993) 391-398.
[37] Y. Yatabe, S. Tavare, D. Shibata, Investigating stem cells in human
colon by using methylation patterns, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98
(2001) 10839-44.
31[38] E. Fuchs, The tortoise and the hair: Slow-cycling cells in the stem cell
race, Cell 137 (2009) 811-819.
[39] L. Li, H. Clevers, Coexistence of quiescent and active adult stem cells
in mammals, Science 327 (2010) 542-545.
32