Title: Suicide-Gene Transfection of Tumor-tropic Placental Stem Cells employing
  Ultrasound-Responsive Nanoparticles
Abstract:   A Trojan-horse strategy for cancer therapy employing tumor-tropic mesenchymal
stem cells transfected with a non-viral nanovector is here presented. In this
sense, ultrasound-responsive mesoporous silica nanoparticles were coated with a
polycation (using two different molecular weights), providing them with gene
transfection capabilities that were evaluated using two different plasmids.
First, the expression of Green Fluorescent Protein was analyzed in
Decidua-derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells after incubation with the silica
nanoparticles. The most successful nanoparticle was then employed to induce the
expression of two suicide genes: cytosine deaminase and uracil phosphoribosyl
transferase, which allow the cells to convert a non-toxic pro-drug
(5-fluorocytosine) into a toxic drug (5-Fluorouridine monophosphate). The
effect of the production of the toxic final product was also evaluated in a
cancer cell line (NMU cells) co-cultured with the transfected vehicle cells,
Decidua-derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells.

Full Text: 1 
 Suicide -Gene Transfection of Tumor -tropic Placental Stem Cells 
employing  Ultrasound -Responsive Nanoparticles  
Juan L. Paris,a,b Paz de la Torre,c M. Victoria Cabañas,a Miguel Manzano,a,b Ana I. Flores*c 
and María Vallet -Regí*a,b 
aDpto. Química en Ciencias Farmacéuticas, Facultad de Farmacia, UCM, Instituto de Investigación 
Sanitaria Hospital 12 de Octubre (imas12), 28040 -Madrid, Spain. E -mail: vallet@ucm.es  
bCentro de  Investigación Biomédica en Red de Bioingeniería, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina (CIBER -
BBN), Spain  
cGrupo de Medicina Regenerativa, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Hospital 12 de Octubre (imas12), 
Madrid, Spain. E-mail: anaisabel.flores@salud.madrid.or g  
Abstract  
A Trojan -horse strategy for cancer therapy employing tumor -tropic mesenchymal stem cells 
transfected with a non -viral nanovector is here presented. In this sense, ultrasound -responsive  
mesoporous  silica nanoparticles were coated with a polycation (using tw o different molecular 
weights) , providing them with gene transfection capabilities that were evaluated using two 
different plasmids. First, the expression of Green Fluorescent Protein was analyzed  in Decidua -
derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells after incubation with the silica nanoparticles. The most 
successful nanoparticle  was then employed to induce the expression of two suicide genes: 
cytosine deaminase and uracil phosphoribosyl  transferase, which allow the cells to convert a 
non-toxic pro-drug (5-fluorocytosine) into a toxic drug (5 -Fluorouridine monophosphate). The 
effect of the production of the toxic final product was also evaluated in a cancer cell line (NMU 
cells) co -culture d with the transfected vehicle cells, Decidua -derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells . 
Keywords : Nanomedicine, Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles, Ultrasound, Mesenchymal Stem 
Cells, Gene Transfection.  2 
 1. Introduction  
Cell-based cancer therapies  have attracted great attention  with many different cell types being 
proposed due to their tumor -tropic behavio r [1–5]. Mesenchymal Stem Cells ( MSCs) have been 
extensively evaluated for cancer therapy  [5] because of their inherent tumor -suppressi ng 
capacities [6,7] , as well as  by their capacity  to be transfe cted with therapeutic genes  [8,9] ,  or 
by acting as carriers of nanodrugs [3,10] . 
Regarding therapeutic approaches involving gene transfection , a promising strategy consists in 
inducing the expression of a suicide gene  [11]. Suicide genes can act either directly, encoding 
a protein that is toxic, or indirectly, encoding an enzyme that can lead to the production of a 
toxic molecule  [11]. Tumor -tropic  cells transfected with suicide genes can induce cell death of  
both, the transfected vehicle cell and the surrounding cancer cells  [8,9,12,13] , in a phenomenon 
known as  the “bystander effect”  [14]. However, most of these approaches have relied on viral 
vectors as transfection agents, which present several safety concerns regar ding their clinical 
application [8,15,16] . Then , gene transfection using non -viral vectors might be more suitable 
for develop ing therapeutic strategies  [12].  
Likewise, a  particularly interesting type of MSCs are Decidua -derived Mesenchymal Stem 
Cells (DMSCs)  obtained from human placenta  [17], which  have been shown to  inhibit tumor  
progression  [6]. We have recently reported the use of DMSCs  as vehicles capable of  
transporting  Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles (NPs)  and Ultrasound -responsive NPs (UR -
NPs)  towards tumors , both in vitro  [17]and in vivo  [18]. These UR -NPs can be loaded with 
doxorubicin (a cytotoxic drug) and then , upon ultrasound exposure, the drug is released  killing 
surrounding cancer cells  [17].  
The objective of the present work is  to use engineered  UR-NPs as non -viral transfection agents 
of a suicide gene to transform DMSCs into a Trojan -horse for cancer therapy . DMSCs  will 
migrate towards tumor tissue while producing the enzyme  which , upon administration of a non -3 
 toxic pro -drug, will generate highly  toxic species capable of killing the surrounding cancer 
cells.  Moreover, a critical  advantage of using a s timulus -responsive nanocarrier, such as UR -
NPs,  is that it could enable  a combined strategy  in which both , small therapeutic molecules, 
like doxorubicin, and a plasmid, are delivered to the vehicle cells. In this combined strategy, 
DMSCs would uptake nanoparticle s carrying both , an anticancer  drug and a plasmid encoding 
suicide genes  for further systemic injection. After m igration towards tumor tissue, a  therapeutic 
effect will be produced by the conversion of an injected non -toxic pro -drug into toxic species. 
Afterwards, a nother  therapeutic effect will happen upon application of ultrasound in the area 
of interest, wh ich would induce the release of  the anticancer  drug. This approach could 
drastically improve the therapeutic outcome by exploiting synergisms between both 
mechanisms of action  [19]. The non -toxic nature of the employed pro-drug and the avoidance 
of premature release of the anticancer  drug by UR -NPs would significantly reduce undesired 
side effects of anticancer  treatments . 
2. Materials and methods  
2.1 Synthesis and evaluation of polycation -coated UR -NPs 
Synthesis of UR -NPs: Ultras ound -responsive Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles were obtained 
as described elsewhere  [20], by grafting the polymeric gate poly -(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl 
methacrylate -co-2-tetrahydropyranyl methacrylate), p(MEO 2MA-co-THPMA), to mesoporous 
silica nanoparticles. Those MCM -41 type mesoporous silica nanoparti cles were prepared 
following a modified Stöber  method, b ased on  the condensation of Tetraethyl orthosilicate 
under dilute conditions in the presence of Hexadecyltrimethyla mmonium bromide [20]. The 
surfactant was removed by ioni c exchange with NH 4NO 3 and the particles were collected by 
centrifugation and washed with ethanol  [18,20] . The ultrasound -responsive copolymer 
p(MEO 2MA-co-THPMA) was obtained by Free Radical Polymerization of MEO 2MA and 
THPMA monomers (90:10 molar ratio in the final polymer) [20]. The copolymer was then 4 
 grafted on the surface of Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles by conjugating it with 3 -
Aminopropyl triethoxysilane (APTES) through dicyclohexylcarbodiimide/ N-
Hydroxysuccinimide (DCC/NHS) chemistry, and then through the condensation of the APTES 
moieties on the silica surface  [17,20] .  
Polyethylenimine (PEI) coating of UR -NPs: UR-NPs were coated with linear PEI of two 
molecular weights ( 1.8 kDa  or 5 kDa ), obtaining UR-NPs@1.8PEI and UR -NPs@5PEI, 
respectively. U R-NPs@PEI  were obtained by dissolving 5 mg of PEI (1.8 or 5 kDa) in 0.5mL 
of deionized (DI)  water with 3 µL of acetic acid (glacial). The PEI solution was then diluted 
with 0.5mL of 10 mM  Phosphate -buffered saline (PBS)  solution . That PEI solution was then 
added to 10 mg of UR -NPs dispersed in PBS (final volume of 2 mL). The coating was carried 
out at 37 ºC for 3 h under orbital stirring. The product was  then washed several times with PBS, 
centrifuged and dried under vacuum  at room temperature . 
The nanoparticles here obtained were charac terized by different techniques. Z potential and 
Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) measurements were performed in DI water by means of a 
Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments) equipped with a 633 nm “red” laser.  Fourier 
Transformed Infrared (FTIR) spectra were obtained in a Nicolet (Thermo Fisher Scientific) 
Nexus spectrometer equipped with a Smart Golden Gate ATR accessory.  Transmission 
Electron Microscopy (TEM) was carried out with a JEOL JEM 2100 instrument operated at 
200 kV, equipped with a CCD camera (KeenView Camera).  Phosphotungstic acid staining was 
employed to detect the presence of organic matter in the obtained  materials. Small Angle X -
ray diffraction ( SAXRD) was performed in a  Philip s X-Pert MPD diffractometer  equipped with 
Cu Kα radiation.  
Cargo loading  and release : The Lower Critical Solution Temperature (LCST) behaviour of 
this system [20] was exploited to load a cargo in the mesopores. UR-NPs (20 mg)  were placed 
at 4 °C an d 5 mL of cargo solution (20 mg/ mL fluorescein in PBS) were added and the 5 
 suspension was stirred for 24 h. The sample was then filtered and washed twice wit h pre-heated  
PBS (50 °C) to remove non -loaded fluorescein. The loaded UR -NPs were then coated with PEI 
as described above.  
For the release experiments, a suspension of 5 mg/mL fluorescein -loaded nanoparticles was 
prepared in 10 mM PBS pH=7.4. UR -NPs suspension was exposed to ultrasound (10 min at 
1.3 MHz and 100 W  in a commercial laboratory ultrasound apparatus  [20]). The samples were 
then incubated at 37 ºC under orbital shaking  for 2 h. The particles were collected by 
centrifugation and the amount of fluorescein released was evaluated by fluorescence 
spectrometry (λ exc 490, λ em 510-590 nm).  Control experiments without ultrasound were 
performed in parallel.  
2.2 Isolation and culture of DMSCs  
Human placentas were obtained from the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology under 
written informed consent approved by the Ethics Committee from Hospital Universi tario 12 
de Octubre . Processing of placental membranes and culture of primary cells was don e as 
previously described [21]. Extra-embry onic membranes were processed by enzymatic 
digestion with trypsin –EDTA (Lonza, Spain). Isolated cells were grown in complete culture 
medium consisting of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 2  
mM of glutamine, 0.1  mM of sodium pyruvate, 55  mM β-mercaptoethanol, 1% non -essentia l 
amino acids, 1% penicillin/ streptomycin, 10% fetal bovine se rum and 10 ng/mL of EGF 
(epider mal growth factor), at 37 ºC, 5% CO 2 and 95% humidity. Non -adherent ce lls were 
discarded after 5 days . At confluence, adherent cells were passaged and seeded at a  density of 
104 cells per cm2. 
2.3 Plasmid binding  to the PEI coating and  transfection  of DMSCs . 6 
 Plasmid binding : Two plasmids were used: a plasmid encoding Green Fluorescence Protein 
(GFP) and a plasmid  containing a suicide fusion gene consisting of the sequences for cytosine 
deaminase  (CD) and uracil phosphoribosyl  transferase (UPRT) . This  CD:UPRT plasmid  
(pSELECT -zeo-Fcy::fur ) was purchased from InvivoGen ( USA ). For transfection, 7.5 µg of 
plasmid were mixed with 1 mg of UR -NPs@PEI in 1 mL of Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's 
Medium (DMEM), stirred at room temperature for 15 min , and then incubated in 5 mL  final 
volume with DMSCs for 2 h at 37 ºC. The transfected cells were washed with P BS twice to 
remove non -internalized nanoparticles and incubated in complete culture medium.  
Transfection of GFP : Expression of GFP was evaluated by fluorescence microscopy and flow 
cytometry 72 hours  after transfection . Fluorescence microscopy was performed with an E VOS  
FL Cell Imaging System from AMG (Advance Microscopy Group). Flow cytometry  was 
performed in a BD FACSCalibur™ cytometer  (Beckton Dickinson) , and data processed  by 
Flowing Software.  
Transfection of CD:UPRT : Expression of CD:UPRT was evaluated by DMSCs viability , 
reverse trans cription polymerase chain reaction ( RT-PCR ) and 5-fluorocytosine (5 -FC) 
conversion in vial .  
DMSCs viability was  assessed after exposure to 0.05 mg/mL of 5 -FC by flow cytometry . Flow 
cytometry  was performed  using apoptosis/necrosis staining kit (BD PharmingenTM FITC 
Annexin  V Apoptosis Detection Kit I) following the manufacturer  instructions.  
In addition, e xpression of transfected CD:UPRT plasmid was assessed by RT -PCR. Total RNA 
was recover ed from silica membrane columns of NZY Total RNA Isolation kit (NZYtech) after 
DNAse I digestion. One microgram of RNA was used for reverse transcription using High 
Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit (Applied Biosystem).  Complementary DNA 
(cDN A) was amplifi ed using the kit SupremeNZY Taq  (NZYtech)  and primers for CD:UPRT 7 
 construction (A), and human β-actin (B) as  control (Table S1). PCR reactions were resolved in 
2 % agarose gel and visualized by SYBR green staining.  
Furthermore, expression of  CD:UPRT plasmid was evaluated by 5 -FC c onversion in vial . CD 
enzyme activity was measured by UV -Vis spectrophotometry with a HELIOS -ZETA UV -vis 
spectrophotometer  [15]. DMSCs (105 cells/experiment) were resuspended in 70 µL PBS and 
lysed by freeze -thawing. Lysates were centrifuged at 15000 rpm for 20 min at  4 ºC and 50 µL 
of supernatant were mixed with 50 µL  of 0.4 mg/mL 5 -FC in PBS and incubated at 37 ºC  for 
0 and 16 h . Then,  40 µL were quenched with 360 µL of 0.1M HCl and absorbance was 
measured at 255 and 290 nm. Enzymatic co nversion of 5 -FC was calculated as described [15]. 
2.4 Co-culture of transfected Tr ojan -horse platform  with NMU cancer cells. 
DMSCs transfected with CD:UPRT -loaded UR-NPs@ 5PEI were co -cultured with NMU rat 
mammary cancer ce lls (ATCC, LGC Standards S.L.U. ) [17,18] . NMU cells were cultured in 
24 well plates at a density of 20,000 cells per well. After 24 h , DMSCs (with or without 
nanoparticles) were seeded in Transwell® culture inserts (0.4 µm pore, polycarbonate 
membranes, tissue cultured treated, Costar®) in a ratio 1:2 (DMSC :NMU ). After 72 hours , 5-
FC was added to the medium at 0.1 mg/mL. Four days later, the inserts were removed and the 
viability of NMU cells was evaluated by Alamar Blue assay following the manufacturer ’s 
instructions. NMU cells were also analyzed by flow cytometry with BD PharmingenTM FITC 
Annexin V Apoptosis Detection Kit I.  
Statistical analyses  were performed by the Student’s t test. 
3. Results and Discussion  
Ultrasound -responsive mesoporous silica nanop articles were engineered to include nucleic 
acids into a polycationic coating to provide gene transfection capacities . The successful 
synthesis of our non -viral gene transfection agent, UR -NPs@PEI, was confirmed by different 8 
 characterization techniques. The prepared nanoparticles  showed  round -shape morphology and 
a diameter around 200 nm, as observed in the TEM micrographs (Figure 1 a). The presence of 
the polymeric ultrasound -responsive gates and the successful coating with two different 
molecular weights of PEI was confirmed by TEM micrographs (Figure S1a, organic matter 
showing darker contrast by staining with phosphotungstic acid ), and by FTIR spectra (Figure 
S1b, bands in the range 1300 -1800 cm-1). TEM micrographs also showed  that the or dered 
porosity of the materials had been maintained throughout their preparation. Additionally, the  
preservation of the  mesopore order (typical of MCM -41 type materials) could be observed in 
all prepared materials in the correspondin g SAXRD  patterns (Figure S1c). Successful coating 
of UR -NPs with both types of PEI was confirmed by the change to positive values in the zeta 
potential (Figure 1b). This positively -charged polymeric coating will enable the binding  of 
negatively -charged plasmid s to be used in gene transfection.  Nanoparticle size measurements 
carried out by DLS show a hydrodynamic diameter of ca. 340 nm for UR -NPs@PEI, which 
then incre ased to ca. 530 nm after DNA complexation (Figure S 2). It is worth mentioning that 
our nanoparticles (and their complexes with nucleic acids) will not be in direct contact with the 
circulatory system, since the nanoparticles will already be inside vehicle cells and non -
internalized nanoparticles will be removed before injection.  
To test the transfection potential of UR -NPs@1.8PEI and UR -NPs@5PEI , the GFP-expressing 
plasmid  was used . Figure 2 show s that no significant gene expression was achieved with 1.8 
kDa PEI -coated NPs . On the other hand,  DMSCs  transfected with UR -NPs@5PEI  expressed 
GFP, as can be observed by fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry . These results are in 
good agreement with previous literature showing that gene transfection efficiency of PEI is 
directly related to its molecular weight  [22]. However, the toxicity of PEI is also related to its 
molecular weight  [22], and when a 25 kDa PEI  was u sed, the vast majority of DMSCs were 
substantially damaged  (data not shown). Therefore, the 5 kDa PEI was chosen for all further 
experiments.    9 
 GFP expression was maintained in transfected DMSCs up to 14 days as was observed by 
fluorescence microscopy  (data not shown) , suggesting that gene expression  would be continued 
after DMSCs migration to tumo r [6,18] . 
Previous data showed that 1.8 kDa PEI coating did not affect the nanoparticle capacity of 
releasing a cargo upon ultrasound exposure  [17]. However, we did not know whether a larger 
polycationic coating could hamper the correct performance of our nanodevice. To assess 
whether  the ultrasound -responsiveness was maintained after 5 KDa PEI coating, an in vial  
cargo release experiment using fluorescein was performed  (Figure 3).  Fluorescence intensity  
in the supernatant of the samples exposed to ultrasound was highly  increased compared to 
samples without insonation , indicating  that the 5 kDa PEI coating does not  prevent the opening 
of the polymeric gate in response to the stimulus.  Upon ultrasound exposure, the monomer  
THPMA  in the polymeric coating , p(MEO 2MA-co-THPMA) , is converted into a much more 
hydrophilic monomer (methacrylic a cid). This change modifies the overall hydrophilicity of 
the system and induces a conformational change of the polymeric gate, exposing the 
nanoparticle pores to the environment and enabling cargo release.  These results confirm the 
on-demand cargo release capabilities of UR -NPs@5PEI, which would enable them to carry a 
toxic drug preventing its premature release, which might compromise the viability of the 
vehicle DMSCs . 
The next step after opt imizing  the conditions for gene transfection using UR-NPs@ 5PEI 
consisted in the use of a plasmid of therapeutic interest to be transfected in  the vehicle DMSCs , 
to obtain our Trojan -horse platform . A plasmid  containing  two genes involved in suicide gene 
therapy , cytosine deaminase (CD) and uracil phosphoribosyltransferase (UPRT) , was used . CD 
convert s non-toxic pro-drug 5-fluorocytosine (5 -FC) into toxic 5 -Fluoruracil (5 -FU), which is 
then further transformed by UPRT  into the more toxic 5 -Fluorouridine monophosphate (5 -
FUMP), an irreversible inhibitor of thymidylate synthase  [23](Schem e 1).  10 
 The plasmid containing the suicide genes (CD:UPRT plasmid) was loaded into the UR -
NPs@5PEI following the same protocol as previously described for the GFP plasmid. Those 
plasmid -loaded nanoparticles were incubated with DMSCs  for 2 h and non -internal ized 
nanoparticles were removed by washing with PBS. Seventy two hours later, 5-FC was added 
to DMSCs  and the viability of DMSCs was evaluated after further incubation for 5 days  (Figure 
4). Bright field microscopy  show ed a reduction in cell culture densit y of transfected DMSCs  
treated with 5 -FC compared to control , while no significant changes were observed with either 
pro-drug addition or transfection alone  (Figure 4a) . These results  could indicate that the suicide 
genes are b eing expressed in DMSCs  and the production of toxic species upon the addition of 
the pro-drug is hampering c ell proliferation. Furthermore, apoptotic nuclei evidenced by 
brighter DAPI staining  were observed  by fl uorescence microscopy  in the transfected DMSCs 
exposed to the pro-drug (Figure 4b), as would be expected from the production of the highly 
toxic 5 -FUMP . DMSCs exposed to those tre atments were also evaluated by f low cytometry 
with an apoptosis -necrosis assay (Figure 4c). In each panel, c ells in the lower left quadrant 
correspond to heal thy cells, lower right quadrant  are early -apoptotic  cells, and upper -right 
quadrant comprises late -apoptotic or necrotic cells. An increase in late apoptotic/necrotic cells 
was observed only in the transfected DMSCs  exposed to 5 -FC.  
Gene expr ession evaluated by RT -PCR confirmed  the production of mRNA corresponding to 
the introduced sequence in DMSCs  treated with  a plasmid -bearing UR-NPs@5PEI  (Figure 
S3a). The expression of the housekeeping β -actin gene was also evaluated . CD:UPRT 
expression was found in transfected DMSCs corresp onding to three independent experiments. 
No CD:UPRT expression was found in control no -transfected DMSCs whereas β -actin 
expression was detectable in all DMSCs cultures. These data confirm the successful and highly 
reproducible transfection of DMSCs with C D:UPRT -bearing UR -NPs@5PEI .  11 
 The activity of the CD:UPRT  enzymes in cell lysates was also assessed in vial  (Figure S3 b).  
A significant conversion of the pro -drug was observed with lysates from transfected DMSC s, 
whereas n o change in 5 -FC concentration was observed with control DMSCs lysates . This 
transformation of the pro -drug 5 -FC into other species demonstrates the expression of the 
enzymes in their active form.  
To sum up, all the above  results confirm the successful transfection of DMSCs with the 
CD:UPRT plasmid,  providing  them the capability of converting non -toxic 5 -FC into toxic 5 -
FUMP , as shown in Scheme 1 . This is especially interesting because the gene transfection 
process has bee n performed with a non -viral vector under conditions where DMSC s viability 
has not been affected (over 90% viable DMSCs  after transfection). Once the vehicle cells have 
reached the tumor site  they will produce the toxic species upon exposure to the pro -drug, which 
is completely devoid of toxicity  in the absence of the activatin g enzyme (over 94  % viable 
DMSCs exposed to the pro -drug) (Figure 4c).  
One of the main advantages of the combination of CD and UPRT genes instead of using the 
CD gene alone is the  increased bystander effect of 5 -FUMP over 5 -FU [23]. In order to test the 
bystander effect of our Trojan -horse platform, a Transwell co -culture with NMU mammary 
cancer cells was carried out  [17,18] . CD:UPRT -transfected DMSCs  were seeded  on a 
Transwell cell culture insert  that was  placed in a well containing NMU cancer cells ( 1:2 ratio, 
DMSC:NMU ). Seventy two hour s after transfection of the DMSCs, the pro -drug 5-FC was 
added to the culture medium, and the viability  of NMU cancer cells was evaluated 96 h later. 
Alamar Blue assay showed  a significant decrease  of NMU cell viability when  exposed to our 
Trojan -horse platform  in combination with 5-FC (Figure 5) . These data indicate  that transfected 
DMSCs produc e a toxic drug when exposed to non -toxic 5 -FC, which  diffuse s from the DMSC 
source , reach ing the surrounding cancer cells and significantly affecting their growth . 
Furthermore,  apoptosis -necrosis analysis by flow cytometry show ed a significant increase in 12 
 the number of early apoptotic NMU cells when employing our Trojan -horse therapeutic 
strategy compared to  the other control  conditions (Figure 6). 
In summary, the presented results confirm the successful preparation of a Trojan -horse 
platform capable of killing  surrounding  NMU  cancer cells by nanoparticle -mediated genetic 
engineered DMSCs. The non -toxic nature of the pro-drug would ensure a good safety profile 
of the therapy, avoiding unnecessary exposure to a toxic molecule in healthy tissues and organs. 
Therefore, this  antica ncer therapeutic approach by the in situ  production of a toxic molecule 
by tumor -tropic DMSCs  transfected by non -viral nanovectors  appears as a very promising tool 
for anticancer therapy . This effect could be additive  to the previously demonstrated ultraso und-
triggered  release of an  anticancer  drug from DMSCs -transported UR-NPs [17] and the inherent 
anticancer  effect of DMSCs  [8]. 
4. Conclusions  
The results obtained in this work demonstrate  the possibility of inducing gene transfection 
using ultrasound -responsive mesoporous  silica nanoparticles , without inducing significant 
toxicity to the vehicle cells  (DMSCs) , by employing a  polyethylenimine  coating  of appropriate 
molecular weight . This developed non -viral transfection agent was  used to transfect DMSCs 
with an expression plasmid co ntaining two suicide gene s, which provided them the capability 
of converting non -toxic 5 -Fluorocytosine into toxic 5 -Fluorouridine monophosphate . 
Moreover, DMSCs transfected with the suicide genes  (Trojan -horse platform) are capable of 
inducing cell death in co -cultured NMU cancer cells, when exposed to the non -toxic pro-drug 
5-Fluorocytosine . 
Acknowledgements  
The authors thank the funding from the European Research Council through the Advanced 
Grant VERDI (ERC -2015 AdG pr oposal no. 694160). Financial support from Ministerio de 13 
 Economía y Competitividad, (MEC), Spain (Project MAT2015 - 64831 -R) is gratefully 
acknowledged. This work was also funded by project PI15/01803 (Instituto de Salud Carlos 
III, Ministry of Econom y, Ind ustry and Competitiveness,  and cofunded by the European 
Regional Development Fund); and by project MultimatChallenge (S2013/MIT -2862 -CM, 
funded by the Regional Government of Madrid and EU Structural Funds), and approved by the 
Ethics Committee of our Insti tution.  
References  
[1] K. Harrington, L. Alvarez -Vallina, M. Crittenden, M. Gough, H. Chong, R.M. Diaz, G. 
Vassaux, N. Lemoine, R. Vile, Cells as Vehicles for Cancer Gene Therapy: The Missing 
Link Between Targeted Vectors and Systemic Delivery?, Hum. Gene Ther. 13 (2002) 
1263 –1280.  
[2] J.M. Pawelek, K.B. Low, D. Bermudes, Bacteria as tumour -targeting vectors, Lancet 
Oncol. 4 (2003) 548 –556.  
[3] M. Roger, A. Clavreul, M. -C. Venier -Julienne, C. Passirani, L. Sindji, P. Schiller, C. 
Montero -Menei, P. Menei, Mesenchymal stem cells as cellular vehicles for delivery of 
nanoparticles to brain tumors, Biomaterials. 31 (2010) 8393 –8401.  
[4] Z. Gao, L. Zhang, J. Hu, Y. Sun, Mesenchymal stem cells: a potential targeted -delivery 
vehicle for anti -cancer drug loaded nanoparticles, Nanomedici ne Nanotechnology, Biol. 
Med. 9 (2013) 174 –184.  
[5] Y.-L. Hu, Y. -H. Fu, Y. Tabata, J. -Q. Gao, Mesenchymal stem cells: A promising 
targeted -delivery vehicle in cancer gene therapy, J. Control. Release. 147 (2010) 154 –
162.  
[6] I. Vegh, M. Grau, M. Gracia, J. Grande, P. de la Torre, A.I. Flores, Decidua 
mesenchymal stem cells migrated toward mammary tumors in vitro and in vivo affecting 
tumor growth and tumor development, Cancer Gene Ther. 20 (2013) 8 –16.  14 
 [7] H. Motaln, C. Schichor, T.T. Lah, Human mesenchymal stem cells and their use in cell -
based therapies, Cancer. 116 (2010) 2519 –2530.  
[8] I.T. Cavarretta, V. Altanerova, M. Matuskova, L. Kucerova, Z. Culig, C. Altaner, 
Adipose Tissue –derived Mesenchymal Ste m Cells Expressing Prodrug -converting 
Enzyme Inhibit Human Prostate Tumor Growth, Mol. Ther. 18 (2010) 223 –231.  
[9] M.-H. You, W. -J. Kim, W. Shim, S. -R. Lee, G. Lee, S. Choi, D. -Y. Kim, Y.M. Kim, H. 
Kim, S. -U. Han, Cytosine deaminase -producing human mesen chymal stem cells 
mediate an antitumor effect in a mouse xenograft model, J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 24 
(2009) 1393 –1400.  
[10] S. Duchi, G. Sotgiu, E. Lucarelli, M. Ballestri, B. Dozza, S. Santi, A. Guerrini, P. 
Dambruoso, S. Giannini, D. Donati, C. Ferro ni, G. Varchi, Mesenchymal stem cells as 
delivery vehicle of porphyrin loaded nanoparticles: effective photoinduced in vitro 
killing of osteosarcoma., J. Control. Release. 168 (2013) 225 –37.  
[11] R.D. Alvarez, J. Gomez -Navarro, M. Wang, M.N. Barnes, T. V.  Strong, R.B. Arani, W. 
Arafat, J. V. Hughes, G.P. Siegal, D.T. Curiel, Adenoviral -Mediated Suicide Gene 
Therapy for Ovarian Cancer, Mol. Ther. 2 (2000) 524 –530.  
[12] I. Roy, M.K. Stachowiak, E.J. Bergey, Nonviral gene transfection nanoparticles: 
function  and applications in the brain, Nanomedicine Nanotechnology, Biol. Med. 4 
(2008) 89 –97.  
[13] L. Kucerova, M. Matuskova, A. Pastorakova, S. Tyciakova, J. Jakubikova, R. Bohovic, 
V. Altanerova, C. Altaner, Cytosine deaminase expressing human mesenchymal ste m 
cells mediated tumour regression in melanoma bearing mice, J. Gene Med. 10 (2008) 
1071 –1082.  
[14] C.J. Springer, I. Niculescu -Duvaz, Prodrug -activating systems in suicide gene therapy, 
J. Clin. Invest. 105 (2000) 1161 –1167.  
[15] L. Kucerova, V. Altaner ova, M. Matuskova, S. Tyciakova, C. Altaner, Adipose Tissue -15 
 Derived Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells Mediated Prodrug Cancer Gene Therapy, 
Cancer Res. 67 (2007) 6304 –6313.  
[16] M. Rezaee, R.K. Oskuee, H. Nassirli, B. Malaekeh -Nikouei, Progress in the 
developm ent of lipopolyplexes as efficient non -viral gene delivery systems, J. Control. 
Release. 236 (2016) 1 –14.  
[17] J.L. Paris, P. de la Torre, M.V. Cabañas, M. Manzano, M. Grau, A.I. Flores, M. Vallet -
Regí, Vectorization of ultrasound -responsive nanoparticles  in placental mesenchymal 
stem cells for cancer therapy, Nanoscale. 9 (2017) 5528 –5537.  
[18] J.L. Paris, P. de la Torre, M. Manzano, M.V. Cabañas, A.I. Flores, M. Vallet -Regí, 
Decidua -derived mesenchymal stem cells as carriers of mesoporous silica nanopar ticles. 
In vitro and in vivo evaluation on mammary tumors, Acta Biomater. 33 (2016) 275 –282.  
[19] Y. Wang, S. Gao, W. -H. Ye, H.S. Yoon, Y. -Y. Yang, Co -delivery of drugs and DNA 
from cationic core –shell nanoparticles self -assembled from a biodegradable cop olymer, 
Nat. Mater. 5 (2006) 791 –796.  
[20] J.L. Paris, M.V. Cabañas, M. Manzano, M. Vallet -Regí, Polymer -Grafted Mesoporous 
Silica Nanoparticles as Ultrasound -Responsive Drug Carriers, ACS Nano. 9 (2015) 
11023 –11033.  
[21] M.I. Macias, J. Grande, A. Moren o, I. Domínguez, R. Bornstein, A.I. Flores, Isolation 
and characterization of true mesenchymal stem cells derived from human term decidua 
capable of multilineage differentiation into all 3 embryonic layers., Am. J. Obstet. 
Gynecol. 203 (2010) 495.e9 -495.e2 3.  
[22] T. Xia, M. Kovochich, M. Liong, H. Meng, S. Kabehie, S. George, J.I. Zink, A.E. Nel, 
Polyethyleneimine Coating Enhances the Cellular Uptake of Mesoporous Silica 
Nanoparticles and Allows Safe Delivery of siRNA and DNA Constructs, ACS Nano. 3 
(2009)  3273 –3286.  
[23] D. Bourbeau, G. Lavoie, J. Nalbantoglu, B. Massie, Suicide gene therapy with an 16 
 adenovirus expressing the fusion gene CD::UPRT in human glioblastomas: different 
sensitivities correlate with p53 status, J. Gene Med. 6 (2004) 1320 –1332.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 17 
 FIGURE CAPTIONS:  
 
Figure 1.  TEM micrograph of UR -NPs@5PEI showing particle size and morphology as a 
representative example of the materials employed in this work (a), Z Potential values of UR -NPs 
without or with PEI coatings of two different molecular weights (1.8  or 5 kDa)(b).  
Figure 2.  Fluorescence microscopy images (left) and flow cytometry (right) of DMSCs 3 days after 
incubation with UR -NPs@PEI carrying the plasmid of GFP (Data are Means ± SD, N=3).  
Figure 3.  Fluorescence emission spectra of fluorescein releas ed from UR-NPs@5PEI 2 h after 
ultrasound (US) application (1.3 MHz, 100 W, 10 min) (left), schematic representation of the 
material before and after insonation (right).  
Scheme 1.  Schematic representation of pro -drug activation. Cytosine deaminase (CD) conv erts 5 -
fluorocytosine (5 -FC) into toxic 5 -Fluoruracil (5 -FU), which is then transformed into 5 -Fluorouridine 
monophosphate (5 -FUMP) by uracil phosphoribosyl transferase (UPRT).  
Figure 4.  Bright field microscopy images showing DMSCs after different treatmen ts with UR -
NPs@5PEI carrying the plasmid with the suicide genes CD:UPRT and/or the non -toxic pro -drug 5 -FC 
(0.05 mg/mL) (a), DAPI -stained fluorescence microscopy images of DMSCs after the same treatments 
showing apoptotic nuclei (brighter nuclei staining) (b), flow cytometry analysis of apoptotis/necrosis in 
DMSCs after different treatments with nanoparticles carrying the suicide genes and/or the non -toxic 
pro-drug 5 -FC (c). Scale bars represent 100 µm.  
Figure 5 . NMU cell viability results obtained by Alama r Blue assay in co -culture with DMSCs (without 
or with nanoparticle -mediated gene transfection) and exposed to 5 -FC (Data are Means ± SD, N=3).  
Figure 6 . Apoptosis/necrosis evaluation by flow cytometry of NMU cells co -cultured with DMSCs 
(without or with n anoparticle -mediated gene transfection).  
 Figure 1  
+
+++
+
+++
+
+++
+
+++-40-30-20-100102030
UR-NPs UR-NPs@1.8PEI UR-NPs@5PEIZ Potential (mV)
200 nma b
UR-NPsUR-NPs@1.8PEI UR-NPs@5PEIFigure 1Figure 2  
Bright Field GFP FluorescenceUR-NPs@1.8PEI
012345678910
Control 1.8 kDa 5 kDa% Transfected CellsUR-NPs@5PEI
UR-NPs@
1.8PEIUR-NPs@
5PEI400 µm  400 µm  
400 µm  400 µm  Figure 2Figure 3  
+
+++
+
+++
020406080100120140160
510 530 550 570 590Fluorescence intensity (a.u.)
Wavelength (nm)No UltrasoundUltrasoundUSFigure 3Figure 4  
Control 5-FC
Transfected Transfected + 5 -FC
5-FC
a
b
Transfected
Transfected + 5 -FC
Control 5-FC
Transfected + 5 -FC Transfected94.34% 0.70%2.39% 2.57%
94.17%0.33%2.46%3.04%
90.26%0.98%5.04%3.73%
70.47%6.61%19.98% 2.93%cFigure 4Figure 5  
**
020406080100120
NMU +5FC NMU/DMSC +5FC NMU/DMSC
(transfected) +5FCNMU Cell viability % Alamar Blue test
NMU/ Trojan -horse
Platform + 5 -FCFigure 5Figure 6  
91.07 7.150.25 1.53
87.44 9.080.29 3.19
89.73 6.480.18 3.62
69.41
28.190.102.31DMSCs DMSCs + 5FC
Trojan -horse PlatformTrojan -horse Platform +5-FCFigure 6Scheme 1  
5-FC 5-FUMPCD UPRT
5-FU
Scheme 1