Title: Theoretical modelling discriminates the stochastic and deterministic
  hypothesis of cell reprogramming
Abstract:   How to induce differentiated cells into pluripotent cells has elicited
researchers' interests for a long time since pluripotent stem cells are able to
offer remarkable potential in numerous subfields of biological research.
However, the nature of cell reprogramming, especially the mechanisms still
remain elusive for the sake of most protocols of inducing pluripotent stem
cells were discovered by screening but not from the knowledge of gene
regulation networks. Generally there are two hypotheses to elucidate the
mechanism termed as elite model and stochastic model which regard reprogramming
process a deterministic process or a stochastic process, respectively. However,
the difference between these two models cannot yet be discriminated
experimentally. Here we used a general mathematical model to elucidate the
nature of cell reprogramming which can fit both hypotheses. We investigated
this process from a novel perspective, the timing. We calculated the time of
reprogramming in a general way and find that noise would play a significant
role if the stochastic hypothesis holds. Thus the two hypotheses may be
discriminated experimentally by counting the time of reprogramming in different
magnitudes of noise. Because our approach is general, our results should
facilitate broad studies of rational design of cell reprogramming protocols.

Full Text: arXiv:1409.2205v2  [q-bio.MN]  8 Dec 2014Theoretical modelling discriminates the stochastic and de terministic hypothesis of cell
reprogramming
Jiawei Yan,∗Pu Zheng,†and Xingjie Pan‡
How to induce diﬀerentiated cells into pluripotent cells ha s elicited researchers’ interests for a
long time since pluripotent stem cells are able to oﬀer remar kable potential in numerous subﬁelds
of biological research. However, the nature of cell reprogr amming, especially the mechanisms still
remain elusive for the sake of most protocols of inducing plu ripotent stem cells were discovered
by screening but not from the knowledge of gene regulation ne tworks. Generally there are two
hypotheses to elucidate the mechanism termed as elite model and stochastic model which regard
reprogramming process a deterministic process or a stochas tic process, respectively. However, the
diﬀerence between these two models cannot yet be discrimina ted experimentally. Here we use
a general mathematical model to elucidate the nature of cell reprogramming which can ﬁt both
hypotheses. We investigate this process from a novel perspe ctive, the timing. We calculate the time
of reprogramming in a general way and ﬁnd that noise would pla y a signiﬁcant role if the stochastic
hypothesis holds. Thus the two hypotheses may be discrimina ted experimentally by counting the
time of reprogramming in diﬀerent magnitudes of noise. Beca use our approach is general, our results
should facilitate broad studies of rational design of cell r eprogramming protocols.
I. INTRODUCTION
Embryonic stem cell, which is able to divide indef-
initely while maintaining pluripotency, is expected to
be useful in numerous subﬁelds of life sciences, includ-
ing toxicology, disease mechanism research[ 1] and re-
generation medicine[ 2][3]. In 2006, Yamanaka and his
colleagues achieved artiﬁcially induced pluripotent stem
(iPS)cellsfrommouseﬁbroblasts[ 4], andlaterfromadult
human ﬁbroblasts[ 5].
Induction of iPS cell is in a very low eﬃciency ( ∼
0.05%) at ﬁrst[ 4][5], and there are several models to ex-
plain the low eﬃciency[ 6]. One of these models, the
stochastic hypothesis, suggests that most or all the cells
arecompetent for reprogrammingbut limited of random-
ness, only a part of cells are able to be reprogrammed in
one experiment. On the other hand, elite model presup-
poses that only a few cells in a culture are competent for
reprogramming and the process is deterministic. Gen-
erally the process of cell reprogramming was regarded
as a stochastic process[ 7][8] at ﬁrst. There are numer-
ous experiments indicated that the process of cell repro-
gramming consists of an earlystochastic phase and a late
hierarchic phase. The low eﬃciency also implies there
is stochasticity. From the point of control theory, this
model may be elucidated as a core control part, which
is multistable and transits from one steady state to an-
other one stochastically, and a downstream signal trans-
duction cascade[ 8]. However, these two models are soon
challenged by other research which shows that cell re-
programming is a deterministic process[ 9] and especially
almost all the cells are able to be reprogrammed into iPS
∗yann.jiawei@gmail.com ; School of Life Sciences, Peking Univer-
sity, Beijing 100871, China
†School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871 , China
‡School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, Chin acells, which conﬂicts with the elite model. The debate
of whether the nature of cell reprogramming process is
stochastic or deterministic hasn’t ended yet, since the
gene regulation networks of cell diﬀerentiation are still
poorly understood[ 10], thus it’s hard to predict how to
induceiPScellseﬃciently. Althoughthebiologicalexper-
iments have yet reveal the nature of cell reprogramming,
there are other approaches to investigate this question.
Because the elite model supposes only a fraction of cells
canbereprogrammed,andthispaperonlyfocusonsingle
cell dynamics, we use the term ’deterministic hypothesis’
instead of ’elite model’ to represent the hypothesis that
cell reprogramming is a deterministic process.
Our aim is to discriminate these two hypotheses, the
stochastic hypothesis and deterministic hypothesis, es-
pecially in the way that the experiments can apply to.
These two hypotheses, apparently, are diﬀerent since one
modelsupposethatnotallthecellscanbereprogrammed
statistically while the other one does. However, this dif-
ference isn’t able to be tested so far by experiments, be-
cause the eﬃciency of reprogramming may not only de-
termined by the nature of reprogrammingbut also by the
other factors including the environment and the method
itself. Therefore, we turned to the dynamics of repro-
gramming. From a perspective of nonlinear dynamics,
diﬀerent cell fates are able to be regarded as a steady
state of a dynamical system, which is the core gene reg-
ulation network for cell fate decision. This concept was
noted by C. Waddington in the 1940s, which by now
is called Waddington’s epigenetic landscape [ 11]. In the
Waddington’smetaphor, thecellfateislikeaballandthe
landscape epitomizes the constraints of dynamical sys-
tem, thusthecellfatecantransitbystochastically’jump’
from one valley to another and the probability of transi-
tion depends on the magnitude of noise and the height of
the hill between two valleys (the energy barrier)[ 10][12].
Under this scenario, the stochastic hypothesis rep-
resents that the cell fate decision network is a tradi-
tional Waddington’s landscape, consisting numerous val-2
leysandhills. Theball(cell fate), isabletostochastically
transit from one valley to another. Here each valley rep-
resents a cell fate and reprogramming process is to trig-
ger cell from one fate to another. On the other hand, in
the deterministic hypothesis stochasticity plays a trivial
role, there is no transition between two steady state and
the cell fate transition is determined by the continuous
alternation of the landscape (ﬁg. 1).
Therefore,aonekeydiﬀerencebetweenthesetwomod-
els is the reprogramming time in stochastic hypothesis
depends not only on the ’energy barrier’ between two
steady state but also on the magnitude of noise while the
reprogrammingtime in deterministic hypothesis depends
only on the dynamics shifting the landscape. This idea is
intuitively obvious. However,the quantitative analysisof
the timescale required for reprogramming still lacks, es-
pecially the contribution of noise to the reprogramming
time. If the noise works trivially for the total time for re-
programming, alternating noise magnitude may not lead
to any signiﬁcant change of reprogramming time.
To calculate the time required for reprogramming of
twohypotheses,wewanttouseoneuniﬁedmodeltocom-
pare the two hypotheses. According to previous studies
on lineage speciﬁcation, mutual inhibition paradigm is
shown to be the most signiﬁcant concept.[ 13][14] For ex-
ample, two opposing transcription factors, GATA1 and
PU.1 plays dominant role in erythroid/megakaryocyte
and myelomonocytic lineage determination respectively.
GATA1 and PU.1 mutual inhibited each other, and also
control their own expression, forming an self-activation
loop(ﬁg. 2a)[15]. Wewillshowthatthissimplemodelﬁts
both stochastic hypothesis and deterministic hypothesis
thus it provides a uniﬁed framework for us to compare
the two distinct hypotheses.
II. METHODS AND MODEL
As previous shown, the core network which in respon-
sible for the cell fate decision is able to be generally re-
garded as mutual inhibition [ 12][17]: two opposing tran-
scription factors xandyinhibited each other while ac-
tivated themselves respectively. This topology is able to
be described by the following ordinary diﬀerential equa-
tions:
dx
dt=α1xm
Kmxx+xm+β1
Kmyx+ym−k1x (1)
dy
dt=α2yn
Knyy+yn+β2
Knxy+xn−k2y (2)
These equations are based on Hill functions which
are generally used in describing gene expression
regulation.[ 16] The ﬁrst item represents the self-
activation of each transcription factor; the second item
represents the mutual inhibition; and the third item de-
scribes the unregulated degradation. One of the bene-
ﬁt to use this simple model is that it exists two typesStochastic Hypothesis Deterministic Hypothesis 
Time 
FIG. 1: Two hypotheses about cell reprogramming mecha-
nism and the basic topology. The essential diﬀerence of thes e
two hypotheses is whether the landscape itself changes duri ng
reprogramming. In the stochastic hypothesis, the landscap e
does not change but the state of cell stochastically transit s
from one steady state to another. In the deterministic hy-
pothesis, the landscape itself change and the state of cell p as-
sively moves from one steady state to another.
of bifurcations (ﬁg. 2). In the type I bifurcation, as the
parameter grows the steady state divides into two and
the system becomes bistable (supercritical bifurcation).
In the type II bifurcation, as the parameter grows, one
steady state disappears and the other two change contin-
uously (subcritical bifurcation).
In the deterministic hypothesis, the stochastic transi-
tion contributes trivially, which means the steady state
has a deterministic trajectory during bifurcation. In the
stochastic hypothesis, both the stem cell and the diﬀer-
entiated cell steady states are intrinsically existed. The
cell is able to ’jump’ from one steady state to another
stochastically. To calculate the reprogramming time, it’s
necessary to calculate the height of the ’energy barrier’
between two steady states. For example, consider a non-
linear dynamic system which has more than one steady
states
dx
dt=F(x) (3)
which the driving force Fexhibits in a nonlinear
manner. If the dynamic system is of one dimension,
there is always a potential function Usatisﬁed UAB=/integraltextxB
xAF(x)dx, which means Uis the primitive of F(x).
In this situation, the transition probability between two
diﬀerent steady states xAandxBis:
PxA→xB=e−UAS
ε2 (4)
whereUASis the ∆Ubetween xAand the highest en-
ergy point between xAandxB(the energy barrier). εis
the magnitude of noise.3
ȦSteady states of variable y 
Steady states of variable y 
ky x
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 100.20.40.60.81.0
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.800.511.522.53(a)
(b) (c)
FIG. 2: (a): The illustration of mutual inhibition. Two gene s inhibit each other while activate themselves respectivel y. (b):
Type I bifurcation ( α=α1=α2= 0.01,K= 0.5,S= 0.5,n= 4,k=k1=k2= 1). Cell diﬀerentiation is similar to the process
of bifurcation. A control parameter (which in this case is th e inhibition coeﬃcient β) alteration leads to the steady states
change and the cell reprogramming process is in reverse. In t his scenario, the cell reprogramming is a deterministic pro cess
which controlled by a certain parameter. The red line is a typ ical trajectory of steady state transition led by bifurcati on with
speedr= 0.7 (See eq. 10) and the arrow represents the direction. (c): Type II bifurc ation (α=α1=α2= 1,β=β1=β2=
1.1,K= 0.5,S= 0.5,n= 4). A control parameter turn the system with 3 steady states to that with 2 steady states, which may
be elucidated as the cell diﬀerentiation process. However, in this scenario, cell reprogramming requires not only the p arameter
alteration but the stochastic transition as well since all t he three steady states have no point of intersection. The red line is a
typical trajectory of steady state transition led by bifurc ation with speed r= 1.2.
However, when the dimension of the system is greater
than 1, the upper theory may not be able to be applied
since the high-dimensional, non-equilibrium systemsgen-
erallyarenot gradientsystem, which meansthe following
equation may not be held:
dx
dt=F(x) =−∇U (5)
Because only the gradient part of the driving force
F(x) determines the transition rate between two steady
states, it’s ideal to decompose the driving force into two
parts: a gradient of potential −∇Uand the remanent as
following:
dx
dt=F(x) =−D∇U+Fr (6)
whereDis the diﬀusion coeﬃcient tensor and here ac-
countingforthemagnitudeofnoise.[ 19]Therearenumer-
ous methods to decompose the driving force[ 18], here we
use the decomposition based on the ﬂux of the probabil-
ity which the probability can be described as a diﬀusion
equation:
∂P
∂t+∇·J(x,t) = 0 (7)The diﬀusion equation describes a conservation of
probability (local change is due to net ﬂux). Flux vec-
torJis deﬁned as J=FP−D·∂P
∂x.[20] representing
the speed of the ﬂow of the probability in concentration
spacex.
In the steady state∂P
∂t= 0, then ∇·J(x,t) = 0. If the
system is an equilibrium system, ∇ ·J(x,t) = 0 always
leads to J= 0. However, for a nonequilibrium system,
this condition does not mean that Jhave to vanish be-
cause the detailed balance condition is satisﬁed. There-
fore, deviating from the deﬁnition of J, the ﬂux in the
steady state is deﬁned as: Jss=FPss−D·∂Pss
∂x, so:
F=D·∂Pss
∂x/Pss+Jss/Pss=D·∂U
∂x+Jss/Pss(8)
whereU=−lnPss. SoUreﬂects the potential and
Fr=Jss/Pss.
The quasi-potential Uis able to be calculated by U=
−lnPsswhichPssis calculated through a Fokker-Planck
equation:
∂P
∂t=−∇·(FP)+D∇2P (9)
This equation was solved numerically by ﬁnite diﬀer-
ence method with the second boundary condition.(ﬁg. 4)4
III. RESULTS
As previous discussed, there are two types of bifurca-
tion generally in the model (see Methods). The ﬁrst type
is illustrated in ﬁg. 2b, which the bifurcation is controlled
by the inhibition coeﬃcients β. This bifurcation could be
elucidated from a biological perspective as a determinis-
tic transition from one state ( e.g.ESC state) to another
state (e.g.stomatic cell state). The second type of bifur-
cation is illustrated in ﬁg. 2c, which the degradation rate
kcontrols the systems with 3 steady states to 2 steady
states. This type may be elucidated as the ESC state
goes to the diﬀerentiated state like stomatic cell through
bifurcation or stochastic transition from one steady state
to another and reprogramming required stochastic state
transition but not only bifurcation.
Our aim is to discriminate the two hypotheses by their
characteristic time for reprogramming. To simulate the
experiments approach of reprogramming, we used a sim-
ple exponential equation to represent the eﬀect of trans-
formation of genes into somatic cell to reprogramme[ 4] or
add chemical small molecules to reprogramme[ 21], which
trigger the control parameter’s change.
θ(t) =θb+(θ0−θb)e−rt(10)
Hereθis the control parameter which in the type I bi-
furcation is β, and in the type II bifurcation, k.θbis
the basal level of θ, which means the ﬁnal θvalue;θ0is
the original level of θ, representing the θvalue of diﬀer-
entiated cell state; and rrepresents how fast θdeclines.
When the system with θ0reaches its steady state, θbe-
gins to changeas in Equation 10, then the time for reach-
ing the new steady state is calculated.
A. Deterministic Hypothesis
The time for reprogramming in the type I bifurcation
is calculated through the method above. In this scenario,
the time to reaching the new steady state is exactly the
time for reprogrammingsince there is no stochastic tran-
sition. Atypical trajectoryofreprogrammingis shownin
ﬁg.2b (red line, the arrow indicates the direction). The
results (ﬁg. 3a) shows that in a wide range of declining
raterand the ﬁnal θvalue, the timescale for reprogram-
ming is 101.
B. Stochastic Hypothesis
The time for reprogramming in the type II bifurca-
tion consists of two parts: the deterministic transition
and stochastic transition. The ﬁrst part is calculated as
the above-mentioned approach. The results is shown in
ﬁg.3b, which indicated that the characteristic timescale
isabout100to101. Atypicaltrajectoryisshowninﬁg. 2c
(red line), it demonstrates that without the stochasticity,the diﬀerentiated states can never return to the stem cell
state. For the second part, the Fokker-Planck equation
(see Methods, eq. 9) is solved (ﬁg. 4).
The large deviation theory predicts when a rare event
occurs, it will follow the optimal transition path with
high probability.[ 22] So the energy barrier is the quasi-
potential diﬀerence between the steady state and the
saddle point between two steady state (ﬁg. 4). Accord-
ing to [23][24], the noise magnitude Dof Fokker-Plank
equation is approximately equal to1
2Ω−1
2, which Ω is
the system’s size, that here is chosen as the average
number of molecules. If so, since most proteins in a
mammalian cell have average numbers about 104∼109
magnitude,[ 25][26] the noise magnitude Dhere would be
about 10−3∼10−2. We calculated the energy barrier
with control parameter kvalue of 1.0 1.2 and diﬀerent
noise magnitudes Dranging from 0.005 to 0.1. The re-
sults are shown in ﬁg. 5.
Then the time for stochastic transition is able to esti-
mate according to [ 27]. The Mean Switch Time (MST)
τof transition from diﬀerentiated state to stem cell state
is:
τ≈TeK∆S(11)
HereTis a prefactor, Kis the system size which is
usually chosen as the typical number of proteins, and
∆Sis the energy barrier. However, there are no available
methods to obtain Tanalytically in high dimensions for
the geometry problem and non-gradient nature.[ 28] For-
tunately, Tvaries slowly in many cases [ 29], therefore it
can be ﬁtted from the numerical results. We apply the
stochastic simulation by a Langevin approach and the
MST is estimated by Mean First-PassageTime (MFPT).
The results are shown in Fig. 5, it indicates that noise
in a reasonable magnitude plays an strikingly signiﬁ-
cant role. The average time for stochastic transition is
in the timescale about 102, which is much longer than
the time of steady steady state transition led by bifurca-
tion (Fig. 3). However, if the noise can be tuned at least
10 times lower than natural level, the time of stochastic
transition is negligible.
Surprisingly, the relationship between MST (or energy
barrier ∆ S) andkis depended on the noise magnitude
D. When the noise is in a medium strength ( D= 0.01),
MST is increasing exponentially with k. However, when
the noise decreases ( D= 0.005), MST has a minimum
value when k= 1.1 (ﬁg.5). The results indicate that the
noise inﬂuence not only the Mean Switch Time, but also
the optimum value of the control parameter k.
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
A. Biological Signiﬁcance
In this paper, we have presented a general framework
of cell reprogramming and proposed a new methodology5
 
 04812 16 20 
00.10.20.30.4
θb
0.5 1 1.5
r0.5 1 1.5
r0.80.91.01.11.2
θb 
 (a) (b)
FIG. 3: Timescales required for steady states transition du ring bifurcation. a: Type I bifurcation. The time is the tota l time
for cell reprogramming. b: Type II bifurcation. The time is o nly the ﬁrst part of the total time for reprogramming. It show s
that in a wide range of declining rate randθb, the time scale is 101. The parameter used in this paper is normalized by the
dimension unit of protein degradation rate, which in mammal ian cell is usually about 10−1h−1, so the time calculated here
would be 10 times greater than the actual time. In the rest of t he paper, we used this non-dimensional-normalized time uni t.
0.5 1 1.5 22
1.5
1
0.513 
11 
9
7
5D=0.005 D=0.01
D=0.05 D=0.1
0.5 1 1.5 22
1.5
1
0.5
2
1.5
1
0.52
1.5
1
0.5
0.5 1 1.5 2 0.5 1 1.5 2
FIG. 4: The Quasi-potential landscapes with diﬀerent noise magnitudes. α=α1=α2= 1,β=β1=β2= 1.1,K= 0.5,S=
0.5,n= 4,k=k1=k2= 1.2.U=−lnPssis the quasi-potential as described ahead (See Methods). Th e quasi-potential was
obtained by the ﬁnite diﬀerence method[ 18],Pk+1=Pk+τ·δ. After the iteration, the sum of δis less than 10−6. It indicates
that when noise is larger than 0.05, there is only one attract or, which means cells will not stay in the diﬀerentiated stat es
anymore in a very noisy environment. However, if the noise ma gnitude is 10−3∼10−2as analyzed in the paper, there will
remain three steady states and the stochastic transition is necessary.6
0 100 200 300 400 50000.511.522.53
Time Value of variable y MFPT	B
 	C
 
2345Mean Switch Time 
0.8 0.9 1 1.1 1.2
k110 
10 
10 
10 
10 
FIG. 5: (a): The Mean Switch Time under diﬀerent noise magnit udes. Blue dots are the MST with D= 0.01, and blue line
is the ﬁtting results from the Langevin equation. Purple dot s are MST with D= 0.005. It shows that a slight diminishment
of noise leads to a tremendous change of MST. Nevertheless, t ime of stochastic transition cannot be neglected in the in vivo
biological noise magnitude. (b): Using stochastic simulat ion to estimate MST and the prefactor T, here the MST is estimated
by the Mean First-Passage Time (MFPT). The simulation begin s in the steady state, and the MFPT is the time when the
variable ﬁrst pass the other steady state determined by ODE. HereTis ﬁtted as 0.1386.
to test the nature of reprogrammingprocess. Our results
indicate that if reprogramming is a stochastic process,
the magnitude of noise inﬂuences signiﬁcantly the total
time required for reprogramming. However, so far there
is few experiments focus on the role of noise in the cell
reprogramming.
Biological noise has been studied intensely in recent
years, we know for a constitutive gene, the noise strength
is:[30]
σ2
p
< p >∼=1+b (12)
Herebis the average number of proteins translated
by per mRNA transcript. Therefore it’s possible to tune
the noise magnitude without altering the average gene
expression level. This idea is able to test experimentally.
For example, in [ 5], the cells are reprogrammedby exoge-
nous gene expressions. If the stochastic hypothesis holds,
the time for reprogramming would be signiﬁcantly diﬀer-
ent in diﬀerent magnitudes of noise of those exogenous
gene expressions. Our dataindicates ifthe noise strength
was tuned to 10 times greater than the current magni-
tude, the cell for reprogrammingwould reduce morethan
10 times. If the deterministic hypothesis holds, the time
would not change. Tuning the noise will not change the
time for reprogramming but the percentage of iPS cell
because the ﬂuctuation of protein level.
Another role that noise may facilitate research of cell
reprogramming is ﬂuctuation correlation. In the type I
bifurcation, the reprogrammingprocess experiences a su-
percritical bifurcation, which the noise may show a ﬂuc-
tuation correlations [ 31], a critical phenomenon in sta-
tistical physics. However, in the type II bifurcation, the
transition of steady state does not pass trough the bi-
furcation point so the ﬂuctuation correlation would notoccur. So far there is no experiments applied focusing on
this prediction and it would be interesting to investigate
both theoretically and experimentally.
B. Limitations
Ourresults, basedondynamicalsystemsandperturba-
tion theory, provide a theoretical framework which may
facilitatetherationaldesignofcellreprogrammingproto-
cols in the future. We focus on the temporal character,
the timescale, but not the properties of steady states.
However, our results are based on a minimum mathe-
matical model with artiﬁcial parameters. The real bio-
logical network for cell-fate decision may be much more
complex, and in diﬀerent systems, the network may be
also diﬀerent. For example, in erythroid/megakaryocyte
and myelomonocytic lineage determination mentioned in
this paper, mutual inhibition with self-activation is the
core network, while the embryonic stem cell-fate decision
depend on a ”Seesaw” Model [ 32]. Besides, the param-
eters used in the model is regarded as symmetrical ( e.g.
β1=β2,k1=k2), when parameters are altered unsym-
metrically, the bifurcation diagram will be slightly diﬀer-
ent. Our model is a kind of ”toy model” captured only
the essential features, the application to a real biological
network deserves future work.
In summary, our model provides a novel perspective to
test the hypotheses of cell reprogramming. We studied
a general model which is able to ﬁt both deterministic
and stochastic hypothesis and quantitatively calculated
the time to re-reaching the steady state during bifurca-
tion and mean switch time of stochastic transition. We
hope our results may facilitate the future research on cell
reprogramming.7
[1] J.A. Thomson, J. Itskovitz-Eldor, et al., Science 282,
1145 (1998).
[2] M. Mimeault, R. Hauke,S.K. Batra, Clin. Pharmacol.
Ther.82, 252 (2007).
[3] S.M. Wu, K. Hochedlinger, Nat. cell biol. 13, 497 (2011).
[4] K. Takahashi, S. Yamanaka, Cell 126, 663 (2006).
[5] K. Takahashi,K. Tanabe, et al., Cell131, 861 (2007).
[6] S. Yamanaka, Nature 460, 49 (2009).
[7] J. Hanna, et al., Nature 462, 595 (2009).
[8] Y. Buganim, et al., Cell150, 1209 (2012).
[9] Y. Rais, et al., Nature 502, 65 (2013).
[10] B.D. MacArthur, A. Maayan, I.R. Lemischka, Nat. Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol. 10, 672-681 (2009).
[11] C.H. Waddington, The Strategy of the Genes; a Discus-
sion of Some Aspects of Theoretical Biology , (London:
Allen & Unwin, 1957).
[12] T. Enver, et al., Cell Stem Cell 4, 387 (2009).
[13] S.H. Orkin, L.I. Zon, Cell 132, 631 (2008).
[14] S. Huang, Trends Genet. 27, 55 (2011).
[15] T. Graf, T. Enver, Nature 462, 587 (2009).
[16] U. Alon, An introduction to systems biology: design prin-
ciples of biological circuits , (CRC press, 2006).
[17] S. Huang, et al., Dev. Biol. 305, 695 (2007).
[18] J.X. Zhou, M.D.S. Aliyu, E. Aurell, S. Huang, J. R. Soc.Interface 9, 3539 (2012).
[19] J. Wang, L. Xu, E. Wang, S. Huang, Biophys. J. 99, 29
(2010).
[20] J. Wang, L. Xu, E. Wang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
105, 12271 (2008).
[21] P. Hou, et al., Science 341, 651 (2013).
[22] S.S. Varadhan, Large deviations and applications ,
(SIAM, Philadelphia, 1984).
[23] N.G. van Kampen, Stochastic processes in physics and
chemistry , (Elsevier, 1992).
[24] J. Keizer, Statistical thermodynamics of nonequilibrium
processes , (Springer, 1987).
[25] B. Schwanh¨ ausser, et al., Nature 473, 337 (2011).
[26] N. Nagaraj, et al., Mol. Syst. Biol. 7, (2011).
[27] M.I. Freidlin, A.D. Wentzell, Random perturbations of
dynamical systems , 2nd edition. (Springer, New York,
1998).
[28] R.S. Maier,D.L. Stein, SIAM J. Appl. Math 50, 752
(1997).
[29] C. Lv, et al., PLoS ONE 9(2): e88167 (2014).
[30] E.M. Ozbudak, et al., Nat. Genet. 31, 69 (2002).
[31] M. Scheﬀer, et al., Nature 461, 53 (2009).
[32] J. Shu, et al., Cell153, 963 (2013).