Title: Therapeutic efficacy and promise of stem cell-derived extracellular vesicles in Alzheimer's disease and other aging-related disorders.
Abstract: The term extracellular vesicles (EVs) refers to a variety of heterogeneous nanovesicles secreted by almost all cell types, primarily for intercellular communication and maintaining cellular homeostasis. The role of EVs has been widely reported in the genesis and progression of multiple pathological conditions, and these vesicles are suggested to serve as 'liquid biopsies'. In addition to their use as biomarkers, EVs secreted by specific cell types, especially with stem cell properties, have shown promise as cell-free nanotherapeutics. Stem cell-derived EVs (SC-EVs) have been increasingly used as an attractive alternative to stem cell therapies and have been reported to promote regeneration of aging-associated tissue loss and function. SC-EVs treatment ameliorates brain and peripheral aging, reproductive dysfunctions and inhibits cellular senescence, thereby reversing several aging-related disorders and dysfunctions. The anti-aging therapeutic potential of SC-EVs depends on multiple factors, including the type of stem cells, the age of the source stem cells, and their physiological state. In this review, we briefly describe studies related to the promising effects of SC-EVs against various aging-related pathologies, and then we focus in-depth on the therapeutic benefits of SC-EVs against Alzheimer's disease, one of the most devastating neurodegenerative diseases in elderly individuals. Numerous studies in transgenic mouse models have reported the usefulness of SC-EVs in targeting the pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease, including amyloid plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and neuroinflammation, leading to improved neuronal protection, synaptic plasticity, and cognitive measures. Cell culture studies have further identified the underlying molecular mechanisms through which SC-EVs reduce amyloid beta (Aβ) levels or shift microglia phenotype from pro-inflammatory to anti-inflammatory state. Interestingly, multiple routes of administration, including nasal delivery, have confirmed that SC-EVs could cross the blood-brain barrier. Due to this, SC-EVs have also been tested to deliver specific therapeutic cargo molecule/s (e.g., neprilysin) to the brain. Despite these promises, several challenges related to quality control, scalability, and biodistribution remain, hindering the realization of the vast clinical promise of SC-EVs.
Full Text: Error downloading full text