Title: Tissue Engineering of Skin Regeneration and Hair Growth
Abstract:   Many people suffering from skin disorders such as chronic wounds, non-healing
ulcers, and diabetic ulcers need skin repair and regeneration. Aside from the
diseases listed above, the industry needed a skin rejuvenation system and
regeneration for cosmetic purposes. The procedure used to deliver pluripotent
stem cells to the desired tissue was known as reconstructive medicine.
Mesenchymal stem cells are the most fascinating since, when put in the correct
setting and stimulated with the proper growth factors, they could choose a
pathway to differentiate into the desired tissue. They are also very available,
inexpensive, simple to extract, and reproducible. These mesenchymal stem cells
are derived from bone marrow, bone, connective tissues, fats, and other
tissues. Fat is the ideal reservoir for mesenchymal cells that have recently
been identified. Fibrous, collagen fibers and fibroblasts create fat.

Full Text: Mohammadr
eza Ahmadi
Tissue Engineering and Regeneration of Skin
and Hair Follicle Growth From Stem Cells
INTRODUCTION 
Many people with skin diseases such as chronic wounds,
non-healing and diabetic 
ulcers need reconstruction and regeneration of their skin. In addition, the medical industry also 
needed a method of skin rejuvenation and reconstruction for cosmetic purposes, even for 
healthy people. Reconstructive medicine used the method to deliver pluripotent stem cells to the 
targeted tissue. 
33 years after the introduction of bone marrow stem cells, fat-derived stem cells have 
become an excellent source for cell therapy. In 1961, two Canadian scientists first introduced 
stem cells. These cells, later found to be hematopoietic stem cells, have been used successfully 
to treat leukemia and some severe autoimmune diseases called bone marrow transplants. In 
1968, another stem cell was introduced into the bone marrow, which has been shown to be 
effective due to its high ability to regulate immunity in many diseases, including skin, bone, joint 
diseases, heart, brain, nerves, and kidney. Nevertheless, it took scientists another 33 years to 
discover that human adipose tissue also has a stem cell, similar to bone marrow stem cells. 
Each gram of human fat has 100 to 500 times more stem cells than bone marrow and is easier 
to obtain. Although there are differences in bone marrow stem cells and fat, these advantages 
have attracted the attention of many researchers. 
Mesenchymal stem cells are the most interesting because when they get placed in the 
right environment and are coupled with the proper growth factors, they can choose a pathway to 
differentiate into that targeted tissue. Also, they are very accessible, inexpensive, easy to 
extract, and reproducible. The sources of these mesenchymal stem cells are bone marrow, 
bone, connective tissues, fats, etc. The best reservoir that has recently been discovered for 
mesenchymal cells is fat. Fats are made out of fibrous, collagen fibers, and fibroblasts. 
On one hand, by injecting collagenase enzymes into the fat, all the collagen fibers and 
fibroblasts would slip away, and the pure mesenchymal stem cells would be available. On the 
other hand, In the engineered stem cell vascular fraction (SVF), which is a pellet containing 
mesenchymal cells, growth factors, inflammatory cells like macrophage-monocyte and 
fibroblasts, the mesenchymal cells get separated from all the other components by the 
centrifugation process. Placing the mesenchymal stem cells into the targeted environment and 
providing the proper growth factors can produce fibroblasts and collagen to reconstruct the skin. 
As mentioned above, the stem cell environment is critical, and there is a possibility of 
stem cell movement due to the blood flow and paracrine, which the stem cell would secrete and 
affect its environment. Therefore, the matrix that keeps the stem cell in its place from getting 
flushed away by the blood flow and affecting its environment, known as the scaffold, was 
discovered. The scaffold has to have specific characteristics that would avoid a foreign body 
reaction; It could not be antigenic ,allergic, or infectious. Additionally, it needed to be accessible 
and cheap to produce. The newest method utilized has been using alginate scaffolds, containing 
the mesenchymal cells and the essential growth factors, into the targeted cell resulting in 
stimulating the CD44 receptors on the skin's fibroblasts, causing a rush of collagen production. 
As we learned in our lectures, the green fluorescent protein bone marrow was implanted into 
non-green fluorescent protein mice resulting from HCT, (hematopoietic cell transplantation) 
improved the animal survival in a mouse model, which was surprising.Focused Tissue 
In this paper, the tissue regeneration 
of skin and the probability of hair growth 
from stem cells are being investigated. Over 
time, The biological skin replacement has 
dramatically improved from individual 
application of skin cells to cells and scaffold 
combinations for treatments, healing, and 
acute and chronic skin wounds. 
Permanent skin substitutes with cellular 
engineering combination has shown to have 
crucial wound closure of more than 90% of 
the total body surface region in burns [7]. As 
an advantage the morbidity and mortality of 
acute and chronic wounds have brought 
lower; However, yet they have been unable 
to eliminate all skin mechanisms and 
functions [7]. Therefore, Hypopigmentation, 
the absence of lymphatic networks and 
stable vascular, hair follicles, sweat glands, 
adipose, and inadequate innervation are 
some of the missing elements of cellular or 
biological skin replacements equation [7]. 
The complete restoration of the anatomy 
and physiology of uninjured skin is highly 
dependent on the modulation of biological 
pathways of embryonic and fetal formation. 
Understanding and incorporating 
developmental biology into possible 
biological skin replacements can have a full 
recovery of anatomy and physiology, along 
with eliminating morbidity from skin wounds 
and scars.
In recent years, improvements in 
early wound excision, respiratory 
assistance, fluid revival, treatment of 
inhalation damage, enhanced immune 
function, infection prevention, integration of 
aerobic activity during healing, and 
advancement of anti-scarring techniques 
have all been accomplished in burn care. 
These advancements also resulted in 
substantial decreases in death, 
hospitalization, and long-term morbidity. 
Many strategies for healing deep partial and 
full-thickness burns have been developed 
by researchers, including the placement of 
the epidermal barrier through autologous or 
allogeneic transplantation. Autologous cells 
can permanently reside on the wound to 
have definitive wound closure. In contrast,
allogeneic cells can stay on the wound for a 
few days or weeks; However, the 
combination of the allogeneic fibroblast with 
biodegradable scaffolds would provide 
extracellular matrix and growth factors 
components would facilitates faster wound 
closure by motivating autologous healing, 
but it does not last long maybe for only a 
few days to weeks.
Potential Issues 
Although these methods do tend to 
decrease mortality in major burns, after 
transplantation, they neglect hair follicles 
and glands. Scientists use techniques which 
can damage cells such as multi-layering of 
a variety of cells and the transition of 
cell-matrix droplets onto a substrate known 
as "ink-jet printing," by amplifying a laser 
pulse. The brief exposures to high pressure, 
temperature, or biochemical toxins would 
damage the cells [7].
Figure 1
. The clinical application of 
autologous engineered skin substitutes.
Potentially Overcome Solution 
Regenerative medicine is meant to 
restore the functionality of a harmed,
malfunctioning, or absent tissue. In 
regenerative medicine, there are three 
primary methods. Cell-based therapies are 
the first approach executed by the cells that 
are delivered to either directly regenerate a 
tissue or through the paracrine functions. 
The second method, the material-based 
methods focuses on biodegradable 
materials that are often fabricated with 
cellular functions. The most important 
method, that is the main focus of this paper, 
is tissue engineering: combining the use of 
cells and a biodegradable scaffold to 
construct a tissue [4]. 
At the base of hair follicle cells 
ADSCs (adipose tissue-related stem cells) 
are mesenchymal stem cells found in 
subcutaneous tissue. Controlling skin 
regeneration, aging, and structural deficits 
are significant roles of these cells [8]. 
Proliferating and dividing into skin 
cells to replace damaged or dead cells are 
known to be done by ADSCs. Additionally, 
they also stimulate cell replication and the 
healing process through an autocrine and 
paracrine pathway by stimulating CD44 
fibroblast receptors. During wound recovery, 
ADSCs have a high capacity to migrate to 
wounded sites and are recruited quickly, in 
addition to their division into dermal 
fibroblasts (DF), endothelial cells, and 
keratinocytes. Adipose-derived stem cells 
are primarily more proliferative and have 
immunoregulatory properties, which means 
they are isolated in a less disruptive and 
more reproducible manner with the 
capability of inactivating T cells [8]. 
Compared to bone marrow, ADSCs have 
higher multipotency, which is actually 
needed more for ectodermal and 
endodermal tissue repair. ADSCs will 
secrete a diverse secretome, resulting in 
increased cell proliferation and 
differentiation, migration, and enhanced 
cellular and microenvironment safety. A set 
of trophic factors that secretome correlates 
to cytokines, growth factors, and 
chemokines that enable ADSCs to function 
as paracrine tools rather than cell 
replacement.
ADSCs were also discovered in 
subcutaneous tissue. This involvement 
plays an essential role in skin restoration 
and regeneration by retaining and 
rejuvenating skin tissue structure (even it 
can be as a physiological reaction to local 
injury) by seeding younger cells to the 
epidermis, which they later differentiate into 
dermal fibroblasts, keratinocytes, and other 
skin components [8]. 
The tendency of different epithelial 
cells to secrete growth factors and 
extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins 
maintains a differentiation of rejuvenation 
and regeneration in the ADSC 
microenvironment. Furthermore, the primary 
sources of extracellular matrix (ECM) are 
ADSCs and DFs proteins involved in skin 
structure and functionality. Extracellular 
vesicles are lipid bilayer vesicles that 
include several RNA organisms (including 
mRNAs and miRNAs), soluble (cytosolic) 
proteins, and transmembrane proteins in the 
proper and functional orientation [8]. EVs 
are involved in various mechanisms, 
including intercellular connectivity, 
membrane protein, lipid recycling, immune 
regulation, apoptosis, angiogenesis, cellular 
proliferation, differentiation, and tissue 
engineering to modulate cell recruitment. 
Exosomes, which are emitted 
through the fusion of the multivesicular 
structure with both microvesicles and the 
cell membrane that have been released 
directly from the cell membrane, are 
examples of extracellular vesicles (EV) [4]. 
The many processes in which EVs are 
active and the elasticity in which they may 
affect the activity of recipient cells allows 
EV, a fascinating subject, to be utilized for 
both therapeutic and diagnostic purposes. 
EVs are implicated in tissue and organ 
injury reconstruction and can clarify any 
paracrine symptoms seen in stem 
cell-based therapeutic approaches. MSCs 
(multipotent mesenchymal stem cells) are 
discovered as residual stem cells in majority 
adult organs, especially adipose tissue. 
These cells exhibit standard mesenchymal 
cell properties in vitro and are segregated 
from the mesenchymal vascular fraction.Extracellular vesicles have a 
paracrine impact on cell morphology, 
migration, proliferation, and differentiation. 
These paracrine results of EV can be 
helpful in regenerative medicine. EV may be 
used in regenerative therapy in various 
ways, like injection, combining with 
hydrogels, and covering scaffolds with EV 
utilizing fibrous tissue hydrogel. Intercellular 
communications are essential roles of EVs 
through secretome that engage in. Thus, 
their content and functionality can vary 
based on the conditions of the vesicular 
generating cells. Changes in EV content in 
response to conditions specific to growth 
would play a crucial role in these cases by 
affecting tissue regeneration and wound 
repair by identifying new pathways into 
intercellular signaling. 
Epidermolysis bullosa is a 
genodermatosis, a hereditary skin disease 
that usually mutations of genes encoding 
extracellular matrix proteins (collagen) are 
the primary cause. Severe and prolonged 
skin blistering with extreme and potentially 
fatal complications are examples of this 
disorder. There is no treatment for 
epidermolysis bullosa at the moment. 
However, enabling autologous therapies 
developed from a patient-specific renewable 
community of cells count as advantages in 
gene therapy and editing methods, along 
with the development of pluripotent stem 
cells from patients with epidermolysis 
bullosa [7].
Another example of skin disease is 
diabetic foot ulcers, known as (DFU), which 
is a significant difficulty that often results in 
infection or even death. The mesenchymal 
stem cell-based therapeutic method has 
shown effectiveness in wound treatment, 
presenting a theoretically systematic 
alternative by treating various microaerobic 
factors.
Figure 2
. The overall combinational 
therapy.
Base Material and The Interaction 
Mechanism
Damaged tissue repair entails the 
existence of cells capable of repairing the 
damaged tissue and the presence of a 
microenvironment that facilitates adequate 
tissue regeneration. Furthermore, cells must 
be directed to form a structure of the 
suitable size, shape, and in certain 
situations, structural support. In damaged 
tissue, the extracellular metric is often 
damaged,  functionally disabled, or missing, 
while In healthy tissue, the ECM guides and 
regulates these processes. 
Scaffolds are structures that include 
the conditions for cell retention and tissue 
regeneration and are used to solve this 
problem. Scaffolds may be either natural 
(decellularized ECM or enhanced elastin - 
or collagen gels) or synthetic (synthetic 
hydrogels or porous polymer scaffolds) [4]. 
To enable suitable cell populations, 
artificial porous scaffolds must meet precise 
criteria. A synthetic scaffold, ideally, offers 
temporary protection microenvironment, 
biodegradable, and is gradually substituted 
by autologous ECM. By providing a porous 
structure required, cells would be able to 
move or they can be seeded in the scaffold 
to provide an environment with a sufficient 
supply of nutrients [4]. Cellular components 
are removed from the tissue using a mixture 
of enzymatic, physical, and chemical 
therapies to reduce the possibility of 
immune responses against antigens and the 
spread of pathogens in these scaffolds.
Electrospinning is the most widely 
utilized technique for creating porous 
synthetic scaffolds since it allows for the 
development of structures of complicated 
geometry variations of fiber forms in both 
mixed and layered configurations. 
Polycaprolactone (PCL), polyglycolic acid 
(PGA), polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA), and 
polylactic acid (PLA) are biodegradable 
polymers used in electrospinning. 
Combining fiber types in complex 
patterns, scaffold degradability, durability, 
and biological activity can be modulated. 
MSC migration, proliferation, and 
osteogenic differentiation are improved by 
coating the scaffold with collagen peptide as 
an example. Scaffolds may also be 
engineered to release proteins, peptides, or 
cytokines through degradation or coating 
fibers with a biodegradable material like 
fibrin or gelatin containing a combination of 
these bioactive molecules. Also, because of 
their heavily hydrated structure, low toxicity, 
and proximity to the extracellular matrix, 
hydrogels are the most commonly used 
bio-inks in tissue engineering to build 
scaffolds. As a result, bio-ink built with 
gelatin and natural polymers is compatible 
with various soft tissue cell types and can 
be combined with biological molecules such 
as proteins, growth factors, and 
pharmaceutical molecules.
Figure 4
. The Bioink hydrogel scaffold 
madel.
CONCLUSION 
Many people suffering from skin 
disorders such as chronic wounds, 
non-healing ulcers, and diabetic ulcers need 
skin repair and regeneration. Aside from the 
diseases listed above, the industry needed 
a skin rejuvenation system and regeneration 
for cosmetic purposes. The procedure used 
to deliver pluripotent stem cells to the 
desired tissue was known as reconstructive 
medicine. Mesenchymal stem cells are the 
most fascinating since, when put in the 
correct setting and stimulated with the 
proper growth factors, they could choose a 
pathway to differentiate into the desired 
tissue. They are also very available, 
inexpensive, simple to extract, and 
reproducible. These mesenchymal stem 
cells are derived from bone marrow, bone, 
connective tissues, fats, and other tissues. 
Fat is the ideal reservoir for mesenchymal 
cells that have recently been identified. 
Fibrous, collagen fibers and fibroblasts 
create fat.
On one side, by injecting 
collagenase enzymes into the fat, all of the 
collagen fibers and fibroblasts can be 
removed, leaving just the pure 
mesenchymal stem cells. In the engineered 
stem cell vascular fraction (SVF), a pellet 
comprising mesenchymal cells, growth 
factors, inflammatory cells such as 
macrophage-monocyte, and fibroblasts, the 
mesenchymal cells are segregated from the 
other components through centrifugation. 
Placing mesenchymal stem cells in the 
target environment and supplying the 
required growth factors can result in the 
formation of fibroblasts, the production of 
collagen, and the reconstruction of the skin. 
As previously stated, the stem cell condition 
is essential, as there is a risk of movement 
of the stem cell due to blood circulation and 
paracrine, which the stem cell will secrete 
and influence its environment. As a result, 
the scaffold is the structure that prevents 
the stem cell from being flushed away by 
the blood supply and disrupting the 
environment. The scaffold must have 
unique properties that prevent foreign body 
reactions, are not antigenic or allergic, and
do not induce infection. It must also be 
affordable and readily available. Alginate 
scaffolds have been used in the most recent 
process. The scaffold containing the 
mesenchymal and critical growth factors 
into the desired cell will, for example, 
activate the CD44 receptors on the skin's 
fibroblasts, increasing collagen output. 
In this matter I genuinely believe that 
this approach would expedite and help the 
reproduction and rejuvenation of skin cells 
by the help of the mesenchymal stems cells, 
and alginate scaffolds.REFERENCES
1.
Zhao, Ting et al. “Emerging Role of 
Mesenchymal Stem Cell-derived 
Exosomes in Regenerative 
Medicine.”
Current stem cell research 
& therapy
vol. 14,6 (2019): 482-494. 
doi:10.2174/1574888X1466619022 
8103230 
2.
Todorova, Dilyana et al. “Extracellular 
Vesicles in Angiogenesis.” 
Circulation research
vol. 120,10 
(2017): 1658-1673. 
doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.117.3096 
81 
3.
Asadujjaman, Md et al. “Extracellular 
Vesicles: The Next Frontier in 
Regenerative Medicine and Drug 
Delivery.”
Advances in experimental 
medicine and biology
vol. 1249 
(2020): 143-160. 
doi:10.1007/978-981-15-3258-0_10 
4.
De Jong, Olivier G et al. “Extracellular 
vesicles: potential roles in 
regenerative medicine.”
Frontiers in 
immunology
vol. 5 608. 3 Dec. 2014, 
doi:10.3389/ﬁmmu.2014.00608 
5.
Boyce, Steven T, and Andrea L Lalley. 
“Tissue engineering of skin and 
regenerative medicine for wound 
care.”
Burns & trauma
vol. 6 4. 24 
Jan. 2018, 
doi:10.1186/s41038-017-0103-y
6.
Sahana, T G, and P D Rekha. 
“Biopolymers: Applications in wound 
healing and skin tissue engineering.” 
Molecular biology reports
vol. 45,6 
(2018): 2857-2867. 
doi:10.1007/s11033-018-4296-3 
7.
Vanden Oever, Michael et al. “Inside 
out: regenerative medicine for 
recessive dystrophic epidermolysis 
bullosa.”
Pediatric research
vol. 
83,1-2 (2018): 318-324. 
doi:10.1038/pr.2017.244 
8.
Mazini, Loubna et al. “Hopes and 
Limits of Adipose-Derived Stem 
Cells (ADSCs) and Mesenchymal 
Stem Cells (MSCs) in Wound 
Healing.”
International journal of 
molecular sciences
vol. 21,4 1306. 
14 Feb. 2020, 
doi:10.3390/ijms21041306 
9.
Guo, Jianming et al. 
“Adipose-derived mesenchymal 
stem cells accelerate diabetic 
wound healing in a similar fashion 
as bone marrow-derived cells.” 
American journal of physiology. Cell 
physiology
vol. 315,6 (2018): 
C885-C896. 
doi:10.1152/ajpcell.00120.2018 
10.
Naderi, Naghmeh et al. “The 
regenerative role of adipose-derived 
stem cells (ADSC) in plastic and 
reconstructive surgery.”
International 
wound journal
vol. 14,1 (2017): 
112-124. doi:10.1111/iwj.12569